 Cost of Long-Term Care: Senior Living, Assisted Living Cost & More | CareScout Call Us Our Solutions Back CareScout Quality Network Find home care providers that meet rigorous quality standards and offer preferred pricing to CareScout members. Care Plans Team up with a licensed nurse to create a personalized roadmap for aging care. Insurance Solutions for individuals and worksite groups. Plan today for tomorrow’s care – with funding solutions that can help you age on your own terms. Cost of Care Resources About Us Our Solutions Back CareScout Quality Network Find home care providers that meet rigorous quality standards and offer preferred pricing to CareScout members. Care Plans Team up with a licensed nurse to create a personalized roadmap for aging care. Insurance Solutions for individuals and worksite groups. Plan today for tomorrow’s care – with funding solutions that can help you age on your own terms. Cost of Care Resources About Us Call Us Call 800-245-1905 Call CareScout Call us for help connecting to care at 800-245-1905 , Monday-Friday, 8:30am-6pm ET. Call 800-245-1905 Close Experiencing caregiver confusion? Get a clear Care Plan from a Licensed Nurse. Calculate the cost of long-term care near you We're proud to provide one of the most trusted resources for understanding long-term care costs, and to support families wherever they are in their aging journey. Not sure where to start planning for care? Our aging Care Plan can help. Take the guesswork out of aging care with a personalized Care Plan, created by a licensed nurse. Get a Care Plan Why conduct a cost of care survey? We've conducted this survey for 20+ years to help give more families the information they need to talk about and plan for long-term care needs. The American population is aging faster than ever before, and people are living longer. Every day until 2030, 10,000 Baby Boomers will turn 65 a and 7 out of 10 people will require long-term care in their lifetime b . The cost for any particular provider may differ significantly from the median cost of care for similar providers in your location. Also, the cost of care can vary widely depending on where care is delivered, the type of services needed, and the level of support required. The Cost of Care Survey tool helps you and your family explore median long-term care costs across the U.S., today and in the future — providing a clearer starting point for planning ahead. Quality care. Personalized service. Lower costs. Find home care providers that meet CareScout's rigorous quality standards and save you money on care. Find quality care Cost of Care Trends and Insights Care costs have changed significantly since we began the Cost of Care Survey in 2004. Below, explore how costs have changed for different long-term care options. Our research in hundreds of metropolitan regions across all 50 states has not only helped individuals plan for their own care but helped policymakers with forecasting and legislative reform. Type Of Service And Rate Type 2025 National Median Values 2024 National Median Values Year-Over-Year Increase Non-Medical Caregiver Hourly $35 $34 3% Skilled Nursing In The Home Hourly $90 N/A N/A Adult Day Health Care Daily $95 $100 -5% Assisted Living Community Monthly $6,200 $5,900 5% Nursing Home Semi-Private Room Monthly $9,581 $9,277 3% Nursing Home Private Room Monthly $10,798 $10,646 1% Cost of Long-Term Care 2022 - 2025 In-Home Care Costs (Non-Medical Caregiver) based on 44 hours per week by 52 weeks $35 National hourly cost for a non-medical caregiver in 2025 as reported hourly. The national median hourly rate for non-medical caregiver services increased to $35 per hour, reflecting a 3% year-over-year increase. At this rate, the annual cost of care totals $80,080, assuming 44 hours of care per week over 52 weeks. Note: Due to price convergence, CareScout has streamlined its reporting; homemaker and home health aide services are now collectively classified as "non-medical caregiver." Private Room Nursing Home costs $129,575 Annual National Median cost for a nursing home private room in 2025 based on 365 days of care. The national median daily rate for a private room in a nursing home rose 1% to $355 per day, bringing the annual cost to $129,575. The national median daily rate for a semi-private room in a nursing home increased 2% to $315 per day, or $114,975 annually. Assisted Living Community costs $74,400 Annual National Median cost for assisted living facility care services in 2025 based on the monthly fee multiplied by 12 months. (Referred to residential care facility in California) The national median monthly cost for assisted living communities increased 5% to $6,200 per month, or $74,400 annually. Source: Cost of Care Survey, July through November 2025 Cost of long-term care support insights National and State Data Tables View cost of care national and state median rates View insights Ranked State Data Find the most expensive and least expensive states for care View insights Key Findings and Methodology Learn more about the Cost of Care Survey View insights Wondering how to fund future care? CareScout can help. Understanding the cost of care is an important first in planning for it. Figuring out how to pay for it is one of the next. Consider insurance options designed to help families plan ahead for future care needs with greater confidence, flexibility, and control. Explore options Find home care providers you can trust. Search the CareScout Quality Network. Find quality care From finances to mobility, get tips and guidance straight from our aging care experts. Explore resources Frequently asked questions When and how was the Cost of Care survey conducted? + From July through November 2025, CareScout contacted 211,985 long-term care providers by phone and email to complete approximately 16,000 surveys including nursing homes, assisted living communities, adult day health facilities and home care providers. How many providers completed the survey? + Surveyors polled home health care providers, resulting in 6,014 completed surveys. Surveyors polled adult day health care facilities, resulting in 608 completed surveys. Surveyors polled licensed assisted living communities, resulting in 4,944 completed surveys. Surveyors polled certified and licensed nursing homes, resulting in 4,425 completed surveys. How are the providers selected for the survey? + Potential respondents were selected from CareScout's nationwide database of providers, supplemented with additional providers in each category of long-term care services. Survey respondents represent all 50 states and the District of Columbia. How many regions are included in the survey? What are Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs)? + The Genworth Cost of Care Survey publishes costs in 434 regions based on the 387 U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) as defined by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. MSAs are urbanized areas with a population of 50,000 or more, along with adjacent counties that have a high degree of social and economic integration. Why is 44 hours for non-medical in-home care the defaulted selection for in-home care? + Since the inception of the survey, CareScout has followed industry guidance with representing 44 hours as the estimated number of hours per week for professional in-home caregivers. Additionally, private duty nurse rates assume that care recipients will need approximately 1 hour of care per week. Since we understand that everyone's situation may vary based on the degree of required care, you can use the "Change weekly In-Home Care hours" section (located below the Cost of Care table) to adjust the number of hours from 7 hours per week to a maximum of 168 hours (24 hours of care / 7 days a week) to better represent your care needs. What are the different types of care settings? + In-Home Care Options Non-Medical Caregiver: Includes a home health aide providing in-home assistance with performing activities of daily living, such as help with bathing, dressing, transferring and toileting that does not require more specialized care. It can also include homemaker services, like providing ancillary assistance with light house cleaning and meal planning and preparation. Skilled Nursing in the Home (Private Duty Nurse): Services are provided by an LPN or an RN and may include dressing changes, wound care, blood draws, injections, intravenous (IV) therapy, catheters, feeding tubes, mediports, medication management, and training of family members to perform some healthcare procedures." beneath home health aide services definition. Services are based on the reported hourly rate. Community Option Adult Day Health Care (ADC): Provides social and support services in a community-based, protective setting. Various models are designed to offer socialization, supervision and structured activities. Some programs may provide personal care, transportation, medical management and meals. Facility Options Assisted Living Community (ALC): Residential arrangements providing personal care and health services. The level of care may not be as extensive as that of a nursing home. Assisted living is often an alternative to a nursing home, or an intermediate level of long-term care. Assisted Living Communities are referred to as Residential Care Facilities in California. Nursing Home Care: These facilities often provide a higher level of supervision and care than Assisted Living Communities. They offer residents personal care assistance, room and board, supervision, medication, therapies and rehabilitation, and on-site nursing care 24 hours a day. Learn more about Long-Term Care and the choices in care settings Sources "2020 Census Will Help Policymakers Prepare for the Incoming Wave of Aging Boomers" census.gov . Site accessed 02/09/26. 2024 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Site accessed 02/09/26. https://acl.gov/ltc/basic-needs/how-much-care-will-you-need . CareScout on facebook CareScout on linkedin About us Why CareScout Corporate Careers Field Team Jobs Newsroom Contact Us For families CareScout Quality Network Care Plans Long-term care planning Cost of Care calculator Resources For policyholders MyCareScout Login For partners Partner Hub LTC providers LTCi carriers Affinities & Associations Legal Privacy policy Washington privacy policy Terms of use Accessibility Get personalized support Call us for help connecting to care at 800-245-1905 , Monday-Friday, 8:30am-6pm ET. "Growing old is mandatory, but growing up is optional!" - Walt Disney "The older you get, the better you get. Unless you're a banana." - Betty White "You know you're getting old when you stoop to tie your shoelaces and wonder what else you could do while you're down there." - George Burns © 2026 CareScout Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved. 854001 030226 About us Why CareScout Corporate Careers Field Team Jobs Newsroom Contact Us For families CareScout Quality Network Care Plans Long-term care planning Cost of Care calculator Resources For policyholders MyCareScout Login For partners Partner Hub LTC providers LTCi carriers Affinities & Associations Legal Privacy policy Washington privacy policy Terms of use Accessibility Get personalized support Call us for help connecting to care at 800-245-1905 , Monday-Friday, 8:30am-6pm ET. CareScout on facebook CareScout on linkedin "Growing old is mandatory, but growing up is optional!" - Walt Disney "The older you get, the better you get. Unless you're a banana." - Betty White "You know you're getting old when you stoop to tie your shoelaces and wonder what else you could do while you're down there." - George Burns © 2026 CareScout Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved. 854001 030226 