                                                                                April 2019


            ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF
  HHS OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PLANNING AND EVALUATION
        OFFICE OF DISABILITY, AGING AND LONG-TERM CARE POLICY


 WHAT IS THE LIFETIME RISK OF NEEDING AND RECEIVING
        LONG-TERM SERVICES AND SUPPORTS?
      The prospect of becoming disabled and needing long-term services and supports
(LTSS) is perhaps the most significant risk facing older Americans. Older adults with
health problems tend to have less wealth than healthier older adults, and wealth tends
to fall when people develop health problems (Johnson 2016a; Poterba, Venti, and Wise
2010, 2012). One study, for example, found that over a nine-year period median
household wealth grew 20 percent for married people ages 70 and older who did not
receive nursing home care, but fell 21 percent for their counterparts who received
nursing home care; for single people who received nursing home care, median
household wealth fell 74 percent (Johnson, Mermin, and Uccello 2006). Home equity
does not decline much at older ages, except when homeowners become widowed or
enter a nursing home (Venti and Wise 2004).

     LTSS needs often lead to financial hardship because paid care is expensive,
public programs like Medicare do not generally cover LTSS costs, and relatively few
people have private insurance coverage that can help defray expenses (Cohen 2014;
Johnson 2016b). Medicaid covers LTSS costs for people with limited income and
assets, but many people incur substantial out-of-pocket costs until they deplete their
financial resources and qualify for benefits (Wiener et al. 2013). Medicaid covers many
nursing homes residents (Spillman and Waidmann 2015), but very few recipients of
residential care or home care (National Center for Health Statistics 2016). Relatively few
home care recipients receive Medicaid benefits because there are long waiting lists for
Medicaid home and community-based services (HCBS), especially in such states as
Texas, Florida, Ohio, and Louisiana (Ng et al. 2015; Peterson et al. 2014). Moreover,
the Medicaid income allowances for HCBS enrollees are often too low to cover
reasonable living expenses (Johnson and Lindner 2016). Inadequate reimbursement
rates may also make residential care communities reluctant to admit Medicaid
beneficiaries (O’Keeffe, O’Keeffe, and Bernard 2003).

      Better information about the risk of receiving LTSS could inform efforts to formulate
alternative financing options for these services and supports, an increasingly important
policy objective as the population ages. Kemper, Komisar, and Alecxih (2005/2006)
projected that 69 percent of adults turning 65 in 2005 would need LTSS before they
died. They defined LTSS needs as limitations with two or more activities of daily living
(ADLs), such as bathing, dressing, and getting up and down, limitations with four or
more instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), such as preparing meals, completing

                                    ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 1
household chores, and taking medication, or receipt of paid LTSS. 1 Kemper and
colleagues also projected that 35 percent of adults turning 65 in 2005 would eventually
enter a nursing home, 13 percent would spend at least some time in a residential care
setting, and 42 percent would receive paid home care. These projections, however, are
based on data mostly from the 1980s and 1990s, and the delivery of LTSS has changed
significantly over the past two decades. Nursing home care has fallen dramatically, for
example, and residential care options have proliferated (Bishop 1999; Freedman and
Spillman 2014; National Center for Health Statistics 2016; Spillman and Black 2006).

       More recent studies provide an updated but incomplete picture of the lifetime risk
of receiving LTSS. Using longitudinal data through 2010, Hurd, Michaud, and
Rohwedder (2014) estimate that 58 percent of adults receive nursing home care after
age 50. However, the study includes short-term stays that generally involve
rehabilitative care following an acute episode, such as a broken hip, and thus overstates
the lifetime risk of receiving long-term nursing home care. Moreover, we are not aware
of any study that uses recent data to estimate the lifetime risk of receiving home care or
residential care. An updated, comprehensive analysis of the lifetime risk of needing and
receiving LTSS can help inform ongoing development of LTSS projection models
(Favreault and Dey 2015).

       This brief provides new evidence on the lifetime risk that older adults will need
LTSS and receive paid services and supports. Using longitudinal household survey data
from 1995 to 2014 from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), we estimated the
likelihood that adults ever develop disabilities after age 65 and receive paid care,
including paid home care, residential care (such as assisted living), nursing home care,
and Medicaid-financed nursing home care, and the duration of need and care spells.
The study focused on severe LTSS needs, defined as: (1) having difficulty with two or
more ADLs expected to last at least 90 days or severe cognitive impairment (SCI); and
(2) receiving unpaid care from family or friends or paid LTSS. We considered only those
nursing home stays that lasted at least 90 days, which we describe as long-term nursing
home care, because shorter stays usually involve rehabilitative care following an acute
episode, not long-term care. The analysis incorporated data from exit interviews of close
family members of recently deceased HRS respondents, who provided information on
LTSS needs and care in the final months of life, when LTSS is most common.

     Estimates of the lifetime risk of needing and receiving LTSS after age 65 and the
duration of LTSS spells were based on statistical techniques that accounted for the
absence of lifetime data for surviving respondents. We also tracked a subset of older
Americans from the onset of severe LTSS needs until death. This part of the analysis
measured LTSS needs and care for HRS respondents ages 70-79 in 1993 who did not
have severe LTSS needs at that time and who died by 2014 (when they were ages 91-
100) with a completed HRS exit interview by a family member providing information on
LTSS in the last months of life. This sample is not representative of all older adults,
because it excludes people who developed disabilities in their 60s or at younger ages,
died before ages 70-79, or who survived to very advanced ages. However, this sample
allowed us to analyze lifetime LTSS experience without having to make assumptions
about future LTSS use by respondents who survived beyond the 2014 survey interview.
See the Technical Appendix for more information on our data and methods.

                                   ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 2
     Our results show that 70 percent of adults who survive to age 65 develop severe
LTSS needs before they die and 48 percent receive some paid care over their lifetime.
Many older people with severe LTSS needs rely exclusively on family and unpaid
caregivers, and most paid care episodes are relatively short. Only 24 percent of older
adults receive more than two years of paid LTSS care, and only 15 percent spend more
than two years in a nursing home. However, the lifetime risk of receiving paid care is not
evenly distributed across the population. Lengthy spells of severe LTSS needs and paid
care are much more common among older adults with few financial resources than their
wealthier counterparts.


Severe LTSS Needs Varies by Demographic Group

      In 2014, 16 percent of adults ages 65 and older had severe LTSS needs and
       8 percent received paid LTSS (Table 1). Five percent received paid home
       care, 1 percent received residential care, and 4 percent received at least 90 days
       of nursing home care, including 2 percent who received Medicaid-financed
       nursing home care.

      Severe LTSS needs and receipt of paid LTSS increases with age and are
       relatively common among women, people of color, and older adults with
       limited education.

      In 2014, 40 percent of adults ages 85 and older had severe LTSS needs,
       compared with 8 percent of those ages 65-74. Adults ages 85 and older were
       also much more likely than younger adults to receive all types of paid LTSS; 13
       percent of the oldest-old received long-term nursing home care, compared with
       only 1 percent of those ages 65-74.

      Older adults who did not complete high school were three times as likely
       as older adults with at least a bachelor’s degree to have severe LTSS
       needs.

      Differences in the use of paid care across population groups may reflect
       differences in the availability of informal care by families and friends, as
       well as differences in the affordability of paid care.

      Among older adults with severe LTSS needs in 2014, 52 percent received
       some paid LTSS (Table 2). Thirty percent received paid home care, 6 percent
       received residential care, and 24 percent received long-term nursing home care,
       including 10 percent who received Medicaid-financed long-term nursing home
       care. Between 2002 and 2014, the share of older adults with severe LTSS needs
       receiving paid home care and residential care increased, while the share
       receiving long-term nursing home care fell.




                                   ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 3
Lifetime Risk of Service LTSS Needs and Paid LTSS

     The chances of ever developing severe LTSS needs and receiving paid
      LTSS after age 65 are much greater than the chances of having such needs
      and receiving such services in a single year. We estimate that 70 percent of
      adults who survive to age 65 develop severe LTSS needs before they die and 48
      percent receive some paid LTSS over their lifetime (Table 3). After age 65, 29
      percent of adults develop severe LTSS needs and receive paid home care, 5
      percent receive residential care, and 28 percent receive at least 90 days of
      nursing home care, including 13 percent who receive long-term Medicaid-
      financed nursing home care.

     Lifetime risk depends on life expectancy and the chances of needing or
      using LTSS at every age. For example, we estimate that 28 percent of older
      adults who did not graduate from high school had severe LTSS needs in 2014,
      compared with only 9 percent of those with at least a bachelor’s degree.
      However, because better-educated adults tend to live longer and LTSS needs
      increase with age, differences in lifetime risk are much narrower. We estimate
      that 72 percent of older adults who did not graduate from high school have
      severe LTSS needs during their lifetime, compared with 66 percent of those with
      at least a bachelor’s degree.

     Those who survive to older ages are more likely to develop severe LTSS
      needs and receive paid LTSS over their lifetime than those who die at
      younger ages. For example, 54 percent of people who survive to age 85
      receive some paid LTSS and 34 percent will receive long-term nursing home
      care, whereas only 23 percent of those who die between ages 65 and 74 receive
      any paid LTSS and only 9 percent receive long-term nursing home care.

     Women are more likely than men to develop severe LTSS needs after age
      65 and receive paid LTSS. We estimate that 75 percent of 65-year-old women
      develop severe LTSS needs before they die, compared with 64 percent of their
      male counterparts; 55 percent of women and 38 percent of men receive some
      paid LTSS over their lifetime. Women are also about two-thirds more likely than
      men to receive long-term nursing home care over their lifetime (34 percent
      versus 20 percent), and about twice as likely to receive long-term Medicaid-
      financed nursing home care (17 percent versus 8 percent).

     Socioeconomic differences in the lifetime risk of developing severe LTSS
      and receiving paid LTSS are relatively small. People of color are only 3
      percentage points more likely than nonHispanic Whites to develop severe LTSS
      needs, and nonHispanic Blacks are only 1 point more likely than nonHispanic
      Whites to receive any paid LTSS. Older adults with a bachelor’s degree are 6
      percentage points less likely than those who did not complete high school to
      develop severe LTSS needs but only 1 point less likely to receive any paid LTSS.




                                 ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 4
Duration of Severe LTSS Needs and Paid LTSS

     Most spells of severe LTSS needs are relatively short. Forty percent of
      adults who develop severe LTSS needs experience such disability for no more
      than two years, and another 22 percent have severe LTSS needs for only 2-4
      years (Table 4). Severe LTSS needs last more than four years for only 38
      percent of older adults with severe LTSS needs and only 26 percent of all adults
      who survive to age 65. Nonetheless, a small portion of older adults are severely
      disabled for a long time; severe needs last more than ten years for 9 percent of
      older adults with severe needs and 6 percent of all older adults.

     Paid LTSS does not generally last nearly as long as severe LTSS needs.
      Only 28 percent of older adults who receive paid LTSS care, only 13 percent of
      all older adults, obtain these paid services and support for more than for four
      years. Only 5 percent of users and 2 percent of all older adults receive paid
      LTSS care for more than ten years. Nearly half (49 percent) of users receive paid
      LTSS for no more than two years. Nursing home care lasts somewhat longer
      than paid home care; 22 percent of paid home care recipients and 25 percent of
      nursing home care recipients obtain those services for more than four years. Fifty
      percent of nursing home residents receive no more than two years of nursing
      home care after age 65, and only 15 percent of all older adults receive more than
      two years of nursing home care. Similarly, 58 percent of paid home care
      recipients and receive no more than two years of paid home care and only 13
      percent of all older adults receive more than two years of paid home care.

     Relatively long disability and paid care spells are common among people
      of color, women, and people with limited income and wealth. Fifty percent of
      older nonHispanic Blacks and 57 percent of older Hispanics who develop severe
      LTSS needs experience those needs for more than four years, compared with
      only 35 percent of nonHispanic Whites (Table 5). Severe LTSS needs last more
      than four years for 47 percent of older adults who had no more than $5,000 in
      nonhousing wealth when they developed severe LTSS needs, but lasted that
      long for only 35 percent of those with more than $200,000 in nonhousing wealth.
      Older adults with limited financial resources likely receive paid LTSS for a
      relatively long time (Table 6), because many qualify for Medicaid-financed care.


Incidence and Duration of LTSS after Ages 70-79

     Seventy-two percent of adults with no more than one ADL limitation at ages
      70-79 develop severe LTSS needs before they die (Table 7). Thirty-seven
      percent have severe LTSS needs for more than two years, and 9 percent have
      severe needs for more than six years. On average, severe LTSS needs last 2.2
      years overall and 3.0 years among those who develop LTSS needs.

     Nearly half (48 percent) of adults in our sample receive some paid LTSS
      before they die and 21 percent receive paid LTSS for more than two years.

                                  ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 5
    Only 3 percent receive paid LTSS for more than six years. For this subset of
    older adults, paid LTSS lasts 1.2 years overall, on average, and 1.6 years among
    people with severe LTSS needs and 2.4 years among people who receive paid
    LTSS.

   Nursing home care is slightly more common than paid home care and
    tends to last longer. Thirty-two percent of adults with no more than one ADL
    limitation at ages 70-79 receive at least 90 days of nursing home care before
    they die, including 13 percent who receive Medicaid-financed long-term nursing
    home care, 28 percent receive paid home care, and 4 percent receive residential
    care. Among users, nursing home care lasts 2.3 years on average, paid home
    care lasts 1.8 years, and residential care lasts 2.5 years. Only 2 percent of our
    sample receive more than six years of nursing home care before they die,
    including only 8 percent of those who ever receive at least 90 days of nursing
    home care.

   Women are more likely than men to develop severe LTSS needs after age
    70, and women’s severe LTSS needs generally last longer. Among adults
    who report no more than one ADL limitation at ages 70-79, 78 percent of women
    develop severe LTSS needs before they die, compared with 65 percent of men
    (Table 8); 44 percent of women, but only 28 percent of men, have severe LTSS
    needs lasting more than two years. The incidence of severe LTSS needs varies
    with other personal characteristics, but the differences are relatively small.

   The duration of LTSS needs differs significantly among groups, with
    people of color--especially nonHispanic Blacks--and people with limited
    financial resources before developing disabilities experiencing much
    longer spells of severe LTSS needs than other people. For example, 43
    percent of those without any financial wealth (or with negative wealth) have
    severe LTSS needs for more than two years, compared with 28 percent of those
    with more than $100,000 of financial wealth; 15 percent of those without any
    financial wealth and only 4 percent of those with more than $100,000 have
    severe LTSS needs for more than six years.

   People with little income or wealth before developing LTSS needs are much
    more likely to receive some paid LTSS by age 85 and are more likely to
    receive paid LTSS for a long time than those with more financial resources.
    Among adults who report no more than one ADL limitation at ages 70-79, 31
    percent of those with no more than $5,000 in nonhousing wealth receive some
    paid LTSS by age 85 and 23 percent receive paid LTSS for more than two years
    (Table 9). By contrast, only 19 percent of those with more than $200,000 in
    nonhousing wealth receive some paid LTSS by age 85 and only 17 percent
    receive some paid LTSS for more than two years.

   Paid LTSS is especially common among women and single adults.
    NonHispanic Blacks are also more likely to receive more than two years of paid
    LTSS than nonHispanic Whites.


                                ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 6
      Fourteen percent of our sample receives more than two years of nursing
       home care and 15 percent receive at least 90 days of care by age 85 (Table
       10). Women are more likely to receive at least 90 days of nursing home care
       than men, and people who were single before they developed LTSS needs are
       more likely to receive nursing home care than people who were married. People
       with less income and wealth before they became disabled are more likely to
       spend more than two years in a nursing home than people with more income and
       wealth, and they tend to enter nursing homes earlier.

      Thirteen percent of adults with no more than one ADL limitation at ages 70-
       79 receive at least 90 days of Medicaid-financed nursing home care before
       they die, and 5 percent receive more than two years of Medicaid-financed
       care. Medicaid-financed nursing home care is relatively common among
       women, African Americans, and people who were unmarried and had little
       income and wealth before they developed LTSS needs. For example, 23 percent
       of adults with no more than $5,000 in nonhousing wealth receive at least 90 days
       of Medicaid-financed nursing home care, compared with only 3 percent of people
       with more than $200,000 in nonhousing wealth.

      People who receive Medicaid-financed nursing home care tend to spend
       more time in nursing homes than those who self-finance their care or have
       private long-term care insurance (LTCI). Among adults ages with no more
       than one ADL limitation at ages 70-79 who subsequently receive at least 90 days
       of nursing home care, the average amount of lifetime nursing home care is 3.2
       years for people who obtain some Medicaid-financed care and 1.7 years for
       people whose stay is never covered by Medicaid (Table 11). Three in ten nursing
       home care recipients who receive some Medicaid-financed care spend more
       than four years in a nursing home, compared with only one in ten nursing home
       care recipients whose care is never covered by Medicaid.


Conclusions
     Although only 16 percent of adults ages 65 and older had severe LTSS needs in
2014 and only 8 percent received paid LTSS care, the lifetime risk of ever needing and
receiving LTSS is much higher. Seventy percent of adults who survive to age 65
develop severe LTSS needs before they die and 48 percent receive some paid LTSS
over their lifetime. After age 65, nearly three out of ten adults develop severe LTSS
needs and receive paid home care, and about the same number receive at least 90
days of nursing home care. However, only 13 percent of older adults receive long-term
Medicaid-financed nursing home care.

     Most spells of severe LTSS needs and paid care are relatively short. Four out of
ten adults who develop severe LTSS needs experience such disability for no more than
two years, and only about one in four of all 65-year-olds experience more than four
years of severe LTSS needs before they die. Lengthy spells of paid LTSS care are even

                                  ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 7
less common. Only 24 percent of older adults receive more than two years of paid LTSS
care, and only 15 percent spend more than two years in a nursing home.

      The lifetime risk of receiving paid care is not evenly distributed across the
population. People with limited education and relatively few financial resources are
more likely to have severe LTSS needs and receive paid care in a year than people with
more education and resources. Over a lifetime, however, socioeconomic differentials in
LTSS risks narrow because well-educated, wealthy adults tend to live longer than other
people. Nonetheless, older adults with limited education and little income and wealth
tend to develop severe LTSS needs and receive paid care at much younger ages than
their wealthier counterparts, and thus are more likely to experience long spells of severe
LTSS needs and paid care than their wealthier counterparts.

     Many older people with LTSS needs rely exclusively on unpaid care from family
and friends, even when their disabilities are severe, perhaps because relatively few
people can afford paid care and private and public LTSS insurance is limited (Johnson
and Wang 2017). In 2014, only one-half of adults ages 65 and older with severe LTSS
needs received any paid LTSS. Only about two-thirds of older adults who eventually
develop severe LTSS needs receive any paid care over their lifetime, and severe LTSS
needs last about twice as long as spells of paid care. This reliance on unpaid care
substantially reduces spending on LTSS but often creates significant burdens for
informal caregivers (Eden and Schulz 2016; Kasper et al. 2015; Wolff et al. 2016).


Technical Appendix
      Our estimates are based on data from the HRS, a longitudinal survey of older
Americans conducted by the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan. It
collects data on a wide range of topics, including health and disability status, receipt of
LTSS, financial status, number of adult children, and basic demographics. The survey’s
sampling frame is complex. The HRS began interviewing a sample of 12,652
respondents in 1992, consisting of adults ages 51-61 and their spouses, with follow-up
interviews in 1994 and 1996. In 1993, it began interviewing another sample of 8,222
respondents, consisting of adults ages 70 and older and their spouses, with a follow-up
interview in 1995. The HRS merged the two samples in 1998 and added new samples
of respondents ages 51-56 and ages 67-74, so that the 1998 sampling frame consisted
of adults ages 51 and older. HRS respondents have been interviewed every other year
since 1998, and the survey adds a new sample of respondents ages 51-56 every six
years (most recently in 2016, although those data are not yet available). In 2014, HRS
interviewed 18,748 respondents, including 18,172 who were older than age 50 and
10,386 who were ages 65 or older.

      All HRS respondents live in the community, not in nursing homes, when first
interviewed, but the HRS follows them into nursing homes as necessary. Proxy
responses are solicited from spouses and other close relatives when respondents are
living in nursing homes or otherwise unable to respond themselves. The HRS also
collects information from next of kin after respondents die, providing information about
disability and care received in the last months of life.

                                    ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 8
     Our study used data from 1995 through 2014, the most recent year available, and
included information about recently deceased respondents from the exit interviews. 2
We restricted our sample to respondents ages 65 and older. The analysis excluded data
from the 1992, 1993, and 1994 HRS waves because many HRS questions about
disability and LTSS in those years differed from questions in later years.

Disability

      The HRS collects detailed information about disability status. Each wave, the HRS
asks respondents if they have any difficulty because of a physical, mental, emotional, or
memory problem with ADLs or IADLs that is expected to last at least three months.
ADLs include getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or
showering, eating, and using the toilet. IADLs include using a map, preparing a hot
meal, shopping for groceries, making a phone call, and taking medication. We classified
respondents who reported that they did not engage in a particular IADL as having a
limitation only if they said that they did not perform that activity because of a health
problem. Exit interviews ask the next of kin if recently deceased respondents received
any help with ADLs or IADLs over the last three months of their lives; it does not ask if
they had any difficulty with these activities.

       The survey assesses cognitive impairment by administering a cognitive test to self-
respondents. The test measures episodic memory and mental status. Interviewers read
a list of ten nouns and ask respondents to recall as many words as possible. After about
five minutes of questions on other topics, interviewers again ask respondents to recall
as many words as possible from the original list of ten nouns. The test measures mental
status by asking respondents to subtract 7 from 100 five successive times; count
backwards ten times; report the month, day, year, and day of the week when
interviewed; name an object they “usually used to cut paper” and the “kind of prickly
plant that grows in the desert;” and name the United States president and vice
president. HRS uses these responses to create a cognitive score, assigning one point
for each correct word recalled (for a maximum score of 20 points), one point for each
successful subtraction of seven (for a maximum score of 5), two points for successfully
counting backwards (one point if successful on the second try but not the first), and one
point for correctly naming each object, the president, the vice president, and each
element of the date (for a maximum score of 8). The total possible score, then, is 35
points. The HRS imputed missing cognition data for self-respondents, based on
demographic, health, and economic variables, as well as cognitive variables from the
current and prior waves (Fisher et al. 2015).3

      Respondents who provide survey information through proxies are more likely than
self-respondents to have cognitive impairments, yet the HRS cannot administer a
cognitive test to them. Instead, the survey asks proxies about several behaviors that are
often symptomatic of SCI--whether respondents ever get lost in a familiar environment,
ever wander off and do not return by themselves, or ever see or hear things that are not
really there. The HRS also asks proxies to rate respondents’ memory, from excellent to
poor. Exit interviews administered to deceased respondents’ next of kin include these
questions about memory and behaviors associated with cognitive impairment.

                                   ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 9
     We classified respondents as having SCI if they scored 7 points or less on the
cognitive test or if their proxy respondents (or next of kin) reported that they had poor
memory or ever exhibited symptoms of SCI. The 7-point threshold is the average of the
8-point threshold used by Herzog and Wallace (1997) to define cognitive impairment
and the 6-point threshold used by Langa, Kabeto, and Weir (2009).

       The analysis measured the lifetime risk of developing severe LTSS needs and the
lifetime risk that adults with severe LTSS needs receive paid LTSS. We classified
individuals as having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS and had
two or more ADL limitations or SCI, a disability threshold similar to that specified in the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) for collecting tax-free
benefits from private LTCI.4

LTSS Use

     The HRS collects data on respondents’ use of various types of LTSS.
Respondents who report receiving help with ADLs or IADLs are asked how much
assistance they received from each helper over the past month and whether each
helper was paid. Exit interviews collect information about help received in a “typical
month” over the last three months of a respondent’s life. The HRS also asks
respondents (and next of kin) about nursing home care, including the number of nights
spent in a nursing home over the past two years or since the previous wave and
whether Medicaid covered any of the costs. The analysis considered only nursing home
care that lasted at least 90 days because people with shorter stays most likely entered a
nursing home for rehabilitative care and may not need long-term care. We used hotdeck
techniques to impute missing responses on length of nursing home stays.

      We also identified respondents who received Medicaid-financed nursing home
care, including both those who explicitly reported that Medicaid paid for at least some of
their nursing home care and those receiving nursing home care who reported having
Medicaid coverage. Because household surveys generally undercount Medicaid
coverage (Call et al. 2008), we also assigned Medicaid to HRS respondents who
reported receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments, which generally
qualifies people for Medicaid.

      Finally, the HRS collects data on residential care. The survey identifies
respondents whose home is part of a retirement community, senior housing, or another
type of housing that provides services for older adults and asks them about the various
services offered. We classified respondents as receiving residential care if they lived in
a senior housing complex that offered group meals, transportation services, nursing
care or an on-site nurse, help with housekeeping chores, or help with bathing, dressing,
or eating and if they used any of these services. Exit interviews do not collect
information on deceased respondents’ living situations, so we could not identify
respondents who received residential care in the final months of their life. Although it is
difficult to measure residential care and many alternative definitions are possible, our
estimate of the overall prevalence of such care using this measure is similar to the


                                    ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 10
recent prevalence estimate published by the National Center for Health Statistics
(2016).

Financial Status

      We constructed measures of household income and wealth, reported in inflation-
adjusted 2015 dollars (based on changes in the consumer price index) and adjusted for
differences in household size. Annual household income included earnings (from both
wage and salary employment and self-employment); pensions and annuities; SSI and
Social Security benefits (including disability insurance benefits); business or farm
income; rent; dividend and interest income; trust funds; royalties; unemployment and
worker’s compensation benefits; veteran’s benefits; welfare; benefits from the
supplemental nutrition assistance program (formerly known as food stamps); alimony;
and lump sums from insurance, pensions, and inheritances received by a respondent or
spouse. Our total household wealth measure consisted of housing wealth, financial
wealth, and other household wealth. Housing wealth included the value of first and
second homes, net of any housing debt (including outstanding mortgages, home loans,
and home equity lines of credit).5 Financial wealth included the value of IRAs; Keoghs;
stocks; mutual funds; investment trusts; bonds; bond funds; CDs; government savings
bonds; treasury bills; checking, savings, and money market accounts; and other
savings, net of nonhousing debt. Other household wealth included the net value of
businesses, vehicles, and real estate (except for primary and secondary residences).
We used imputed financial values when respondents did not report complete
information.

      Our analysis adjusted the measures of household wealth and income for
differences in household size. For married adults, whose resources must cover two
spouses, we divided household wealth by 1.41--the square root of 2. We did not simply
divide income and wealth in half because married couples generally have lower living
expenses than two single adults living alone (Citro and Michael 1995).

Methods

     We began by computing the share of adults ages 65 and older with severe LTSS
needs and the share who received paid LTSS, by type of service. We show how these
shares varied by personal characteristics and how they changed between 2002 and
2014.

     The study then estimated the likelihood that adults ever developed severe LTSS
needs after age 65 and received paid LTSS, including paid home care, residential care
(such as assisted living), nursing home care, and Medicaid-financed nursing home care.
Through 2014, the latest available interview, the HRS was unable to follow some
respondents until death because they were still surviving or they dropped out of the
survey over time. Considering only observed LTSS needs and use for these
respondents would lead us to understate their lifetime experience, and considering only
cases observed from disability onset until death would bias our estimates, because the
sample would overrepresent people who died at relatively young ages or who
developed LTSS needs at relatively old ages. Instead, we accounted for censoring by

                                  ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 11
basing our estimates of lifetime LTSS on Kaplan-Meier survivor functions that started at
age 65 and showed at every subsequent age the share of respondents who had not yet
experienced each outcome.6 Respondents remained in the sample until they
experienced the outcome or dropped out of the survey.7 To show how probabilities vary
by personal characteristics, we also estimated separate functions for men and women
and for various groups defined by race and ethnicity, educational attainment, and age at
death. Our estimates of lifetime outcomes were based on the share that experienced
the outcome by age 95; we excluded outcomes at older ages because our sample
included too few respondents older than 95 to generate reliable estimates. 8 The sample
included 248,232 observations on 25,055 respondents.

     To estimate the duration of severe LTSS needs and use of LTSS, we estimated
hazard models of time to cessation of severe needs (through recovery or, more
commonly, death) or paid care for those respondents with severe LTSS needs and
those receiving LTSS. Our duration models were estimated on a sample of 9,787
respondents with severe LTSS, 5,792 respondents receiving any paid LTSS, 3,625
respondents receiving paid home care, 3,082 respondents receiving long-term nursing
home care, and 1,510 respondents receiving Medicaid-financed nursing home care.

       We also measured the incidence and duration of LTSS needs and care for a
sample of 3,236 HRS respondents ages 70-79 in 1993 who did not have severe LTSS
needs at that time and who died by 2014 (when they were ages 91 to 100) with a
completed HRS exit interview, which provided information on LTSS in the last months of
life. This sample is not representative of all older adults, because it excludes people
who developed disabilities in their 60s or at younger ages, died before ages 70 to 79, or
who survived to very advanced ages. However, this sample allowed us to analyze
lifetime LTSS experience without having to make assumptions about future LTSS use
by respondents who survived beyond the 2014 survey interview.


Endnotes
1.   Stallard (2011) and Brown and Warshawsky (2013) also present estimates of
     lifetime disability and disability transitions, respectively, using somewhat different
     measures.

2.   The 2014 data were preliminary when we completed the analysis. RAND has
     produced a cleaned version of a subset of the HRS data, which we used whenever
     possible. When we completed our analysis, the latest release of the RAND
     dataset, version O, included information through the 2012 interview (Chien et al.
     2015). It does not include data from the exit interviews.

3.   We did not impute missing cognitive scores in the 2014 wave, however. For more
     information about the cognitive measures in the HRS, see McArdle, Fisher, and
     Kadlec (2007) and Ofstedal et al. (2005).

4.   HIPAA stipulates that an individual must be unable to perform two or more ADLs
     for at least 90 days without substantial assistance from someone else or must

                                    ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 12
     require substantial supervision because of SCI. However, the HRS does not ask
     respondents if they need assistance with various ADLs; it only asks if they have
     any difficulty with ADLs. To create a threshold more consistent with HIPAA, we
     added the requirement that individuals must also receive some LTSS.

5.   Information about the value of second homes is not available in the 1993, 1994,
     and 1995 waves, because of problems with the way the HRS collected the data in
     those years.

6.   We subtract this estimate from one to report the share that experienced each
     outcome.

7.   Respondents who died before they experienced the event remained in the sample
     indefinitely, because unlike respondents who dropped out of the survey they could
     never subsequently experience the event.

8.   For more information on survival curves, see Kiefer (1988).




                                  ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 13
References
Bishop, Christine E. 1999. “Where Are the Missing Elders? The Decline in Nursing Home Use,
   1985 and 1995.” Health Affairs, 18(4): 146-55.

Brown, Jason and Mark Warshawsky. 2013. “The Life Care Annuity: A New Empirical
   Examination of an Insurance Innovation That Addresses Problems in the Markets for Life
   Annuities and Long-Term Care Insurance.” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 80(3): 677-703.

Call, Kathleen Thiede, Gestur Davidson, Michael Davern, and Rebecca Nyman. 2008.
    “Medicaid Undercount and Bias to Estimates of Uninsurance: New Estimates and Existing
    Evidence.” Health Services Research, 43(3): 901-14.

Chien, Sandy, Nancy Campbell, Chris Chan, Orla Hayden, Michael Hurd, Regan Main, Joshua
   Mallett, Craig Martin, Colleen McCullough, Erik Meijer, Michael Moldoff, Philip Pantoja,
   Susann Rohwedder, and Patricia St. Clair. 2015. RAND HRS Data Documentation, Version
   O. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.
   http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/modules/meta/rand/randhrso/randhrs_O.pdf.

Citro, Constance F., and Robert T. Michael, editors. 1995. “Measuring Poverty: A New
    Approach.” Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Cohen, Marc A. 2014. “The Current State of the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” Paper
   presented at the 14th Annual Intercompany Long-Term Care Insurance Conference,
   Orlando. http://iltciconf.org/2014/index_htm_files/44-Cohen.pdf.

Eden, Jill, and Richard Schulz, editors. 2016. “Families Caring for an Aging America.”
   Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Favreault, Melissa, and Judith Dey. 2015. “Long-Term Services and Supports for Older
   Americans: Risks and Financing.” Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human
   Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.
   http://aspe.hhs.gov/basic-report/long-term-services-and-supports-older-americans-risks-and-
   financing-research-brief.

Fisher, Gwenith, Halimah Hassan, Jessica D. Faul, Willard L. Rodgers, and David R. Weir.
    2015. “Health and Retirement Study Imputation of Cognitive Functioning Measures: 1992-
    2012.” Ann Arbor, MI: Survey Research Center, University of Michigan.
    http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/modules/meta/xyear/cogimp/desc/COGIMPdd.pdf.

Freedman, Vicki A., and Brenda C. Spillman. 2014. “The Residential Continuum from Home to
   Nursing Home: Size, Characteristics, and Unmet Needs of Older Adults.” Journals of
   Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 69(Suppl 1): S42-S50.

Herzog, A. Regula, and Robert B. Wallace. 1997. “Measures of Cognitive Functioning in the
   AHEAD Study.” Journals of Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
   Sciences, 52: 37-48.

Hurd, Michael D., Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Susann Rohwedder. 2014. “The Lifetime Risk of
   Nursing Home Use.” In Discoveries in the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise (81-
   109). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.


                                      ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 14
Johnson, Richard W. 2016a. “Later-Life Household Wealth before and after Disability Onset.”
   Washington, DC: Urban Institute. https://aspe.hhs.gov/basic-report/later-life-household-
   wealth-and-after-disability-onset.

Johnson, Richard W. 2016b. “Who Is Covered by Private Long-Term Care Insurance?”
   Washington, DC: Urban Institute. http://www.urban.org/research/publication/who-covered-
   private-long-term-care-insurance.

Johnson, Richard W., and Stephan Lindner. 2016. “Older Adults’ Living Expenses and the
   Adequacy of Income Allowances for Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services.”
   Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant
   Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. https://aspe.hhs.gov/basic-report/older-adults-living-
   expenses-and-adequacy-income-allowances-medicaid-home-and-community-based-
   services.

Johnson, Richard W., and Claire Xiaozhi Wang. 2017. “How Many Older Adults Can Afford to
   Purchase Home Care?” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
   Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. Forthcoming at
   http://aspe.hhs.gov.

Johnson, Richard W., Gordon B.T. Mermin, and Cori E. Uccello. 2006. “When the Nest Egg
   Cracks: Financial Consequences of Health Problems, Marital Status Changes, and Job
   Layoffs at Older Ages.” Washington, DC: Urban Institute.
   http://www.urban.org/research/publication/when-nest-egg-cracks.

Kasper, Judith D., Vicki A. Freedman, Brenda C. Spillman, and Jennifer L. Wolff. 2015. “The
   Disproportionate Impact of Dementia on Family and Unpaid Caregiving to Older Adults.”
   Health Affairs, 34(10): 1642-49.

Kemper, Peter, Harriet L. Komisar, and Lisa Alecxih. 2005/2006. “Long-Term Care Over an
  Uncertain Future: What Can Current Retirees Expect?” Inquiry, 42: 335-50.

Kiefer, Nicholas M. 1988. “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions.” Journal of
    Economic Literature, 26:646-79.

Langa, Kenneth M., Mohammed Kabeto, and David Weir. 2009. “Report on Race and Cognitive
   Impairment Using HRS.” In 2010 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures. Chicago, IL:
   Alzheimer’s Association.
   http://www.alz.org/documents_custom/report_alzfactsfigures2010.pdf.

McArdle, John J., Gwenith G. Fisher, and Kelly M. Kadlec. 2007. “Latent Variable Analyses of
  Age Trends of Cognition in the Health and Retirement Study, 1992-2004.” Psychology and
  Aging, 22(3): 525-45.

National Center for Health Statistics. 2016. “Long-Term Care Providers and Services Users in
   the United States: Data from the National Study of Long-Term Care Providers, 2013-2014.”
   Vital and National Health Statistics, 3(38). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health
   Statistics. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_03/sr03_038.pdf.

Ng, Terence, Charlene Harrington, MaryBeth Musumeci, and Erica L. Reaves. 2015. “Medicaid
   Home and Community-Based Services Programs: 2012 Data Update.” Washington, DC:


                                      ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 15
   Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. http://kff.org/medicaid/report/medicaid-
   home-and-community-based-services-programs-2012-data-update/.

Peterson, Greg, Randy Brown, Allison Barrett, Beny Wu, and Christal Stone Valenzano. 2014.
   “Impacts of Waiting Periods for Home and Community-Based Services on Consumers and
   Medicaid Long-Term Care Costs in Iowa.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
   Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Planning and Evaluation.
   https://aspe.hhs.gov/basic-report/impacts-waiting-periods-home-and-community-based-
   services-consumers-and-medicaid-long-term-care-costs-iowa.

Ofstedal, Mary Beth, Gwenith G. Fisher, and A. Regula Herzog. 2005. “Documentation of
   Cognitive Functioning Measures in the Health and Retirement Study.” Ann Arbor, MI: Survey
   Research Center, University of Michigan. http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/userg/dr-
   006.pdf.

O’Keeffe, Janet, Chrstine O’Keeffe, and Shulamit Bernard. 2003. “Using Medicaid to Cover
   Services for Elderly Persons in Residential Care Settings: State Policy Maker and
   Stakeholder Views in Six States.” Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI International.
   https://aspe.hhs.gov/execsum/using-medicaid-cover-services-elderly-persons-residential-
   care-settings-state-policy-maker-and-stakeholder-views-six-states.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 2010. “The Asset Cost of Poor Health.”
   NBER Working Paper 16389. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
   http://www.nber.org/papers/w16389.pdf.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 2012. “Were They Prepared for
   Retirement? Financial Status at Advanced Ages in the HRS and AHEAD Cohorts.” NBER
   Working Paper 17824. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
   http://www.nber.org/papers/w17824.pdf.

Spillman, Brenda C., and Kirsten J. Black. 2006. “The Size and Characteristics of the
    Residential Care Population: Evidence from Three National Surveys.” Washington, DC: U.S.
    Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
    and Evaluation. https://aspe.hhs.gov/execsum/size-and-characteristics-residential-care-
    population-evidence-three-national-surveys.

Spillman, Brenda, and Timothy Waidmann. 2015. “Beyond Spend-Down: The Prevalence and
    Process of Transitions to Medicaid.” Paper presented at the ASPE LTC Financing
    Colloquium, July 30. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
    Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation.
    https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/beyond-spend-down-prevalence-and-process-transitions-
    medicaid.

Stallard, Eric. 2011. “Estimates of the Incidence, Prevalence, Duration, Intensity and Cost of
    Chronic Disability among the U.S. Elderly.” North American Actuarial Journal, 15(1): 32–58.

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. 2004. “Aging and Housing Equity: Another Look.” In
   Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, edited by David A. Wise (127-80). Chicago, IL:
   University of Chicago Press.




                                     ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 16
Wiener Joshua M., Wayne L. Anderson, Galina Khatutsky, Yevgeniya Kaganova, and Janet
   O’Keeffe. 2013. “Medicaid Spend Down: New Estimates and Implications for Long-Term
   Services and Supports Financing Reform.” Long Beach, CA: SCAN Foundation.
   http://www.thescanfoundation.org/rti-international-medicaid-spend-down-newestimates-and-
   implications-long-term-services-and-supports.

Wolff, Jennifer L., Brenda C. Spillman, Vicki A. Freedman, and Judith D. Kasper. 2016. “A
   National Profile of Family and Unpaid Caregivers Who Assist Older Adults With Health Care
   Activities.” JAMA Internal Medicine, 176(3): 372-79.




                                    ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 17
Tables
                 TABLE 1. Prevalence of Severe LTSS Needs and Receipt of Paid LTSS,
                                 Adults Ages 65 and Older, 2014 (%)
                             (by LTSS type and personal characteristics)
                                                                                                            Long-Term
                                   Severe             Any             Paid           Residential        Nursing Home Care
                                 LTSS Needs        Paid LTSS        Home Care           Care                      Medicaid-
                                                                                                        Any
                                                                                                                  Financed
All                                      16               8                5                 1           4            2
Age
  65-74                                  8                3                2                <1               1              <1
  75-84                                  17               8                4                 1               4               1
  85 and older                           40              26               14                 4              13               6
Sex
  Men                                    14               6                3                 1               2               1
  Women                                  17              10                6                 1               5               2
Race and Ethnicity
  NonHispanic White                      14               8                4                 1               4               1
  NonHispanic Black                      22              10                7                <1               4               2
  Hispanic                               23              11                9                 1               2               2
Education
  Not high school graduate               28              13                8                 1               6               3
  High school graduate only
                                         15               8                4                 1               4               2
  or some college
  Bachelor’s degree or more              9                5                3                 1               2               0
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: Estimates were based on a sample of 11,469 respondents ages 65 and older. The analysis classified individuals as
having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS and had 2 or more ADL limitations or SCI. ADLs included
getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or showering, eating, and using the toilet. The analysis
counted only LTSS received by adults with severe LTSS needs and only those nursing home stays that lasted at least 90 days.
Health problems and residential care were measured at the time of the survey interview, receipt of home care was measured
over the 30 days preceding the interview, and nursing home care was measured over the 2 years preceding the interview.
Consequently, some respondents were classified as receiving both home care and nursing home care.



                                  TABLE 2. Prevalence of Paid LTSS,
                      Adults Ages 65 and Older with Severe LTSS Needs, 2002-2014
                                        (by LTSS type and year)
                                                                                                        Long-Term Nursing
                                  Number of         Any Paid        Paid Home        Residential          Home Care (%)
                                 Observations       LTSS (%)         Care (%)         Care (%)                   Medicaid-
                                                                                                        Any
                                                                                                                  Financed
2002                                   2,052              52              25                4            29          13
2006                                   2,061              51              26                5            27          12
2010                                   2,317              52              30                5            25          11
2014                                   2,172              52              30                6            24          10
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: The analysis classified individuals as having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS and had 2 or
more ADL limitations or SCI. ADLs included getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or showering,
eating, and using the toilet. The analysis counted only paid LTSS received by adults with severe LTSS needs and only those
nursing home stays that lasted at least 90 days. Health problems and residential care were measured at the time of the survey
interview, receipt of home care was measured over the 30 days preceding the interview, and nursing home care was measured
over the 2 years preceding the interview. Consequently, the analysis classified some respondents as receiving both home care
and nursing home care.




                                                  ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 18
                     TABLE 3. Probability that Adults Will Ever Develop Severe LTSS
                            Needs and Receive Paid LTSS after Age 65 (%)
                              (by LTSS type and personal characteristics)
                                                                                                              Long-Term
                                   Severe              Any             Paid           Residential        Nursing Home Care
                                 LTSS Needs         Paid LTSS        Home Care           Care                       Medicaid-
                                                                                                          Any
                                                                                                                     Financed
All                                      70              48               29                 5             28           13
Age at Death
  65-74                                  51              23               17                <1                9               5
  75-84                                  63              36               24                 1               19               9
  85 and older                           75              54               31                 5               34              15
Sex
  Men                                    64              38               24                 3               20               8
  Women                                  75              55               33                 6               34              17
Race and Ethnicity
  NonHispanic White                      70              48               28                 5               29              12
  NonHispanic Black                      73              49               32                 2               26              18
  Hispanic                               73              47               39                 2               17              13
Education
  Not high school graduate               72              49               30                 3               29              17
  High school graduate only
                                         70              48               28                 6               29              12
  or some college
  Bachelor’s degree or more              66              48               34                 7               25               5
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: Probabilities were derived from hazard functions estimated for each outcome. The analysis classified individuals as
having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS and had 2 or more ADL limitations or SCI. ADLs included
getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or showering, eating, and using the toilet. The analysis
counted only LTSS received by adults with severe LTSS needs and only those nursing home stays that lasted at least 90 days.



                         TABLE 4. Distribution of Duration in Years of Severe LTSS
                                   Needs and Paid LTSS after Age 65 (%)
                       (older adults with severe LTSS needs or receiving paid LTSS)
                                       No More                                                    More                     More
                                                    2 to 4      4 to 6      6 to 8    8 to 10                   All
                                        Than 2                                                   Than 10                 Than 4
Older Adults with Severe LTSS Needs or Receiving Paid LTSS
Severe LTSS needs                         40          22          14           9         5           9         100          38
Any paid LTSS                             49          23          12           7         4           5         100          28
Paid home care                            58          20           8           6         2           6         100          22
Long-term nursing home care
   All                                    50          25          13           7         3           2         100          25
   Medicaid-financed                      53          24          10           8         3           2         100          23
All Adults Surviving to Age 65
Severe LTSS needs                         28          15          10           6         4           6          70          26
Any paid LTSS                             24          11           6           3         2           2          48          13
Paid home care                            17           6           2           2         1           2          29           7
Long-term nursing home care
   All                                    14           7           4           2         1           1          28           8
   Medicaid-financed                       7           3           1           1         0           0          13           2
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: Estimates were restricted to adults with derived from hazard functions of time to the end of severe LTSS needs
(through permanent recovery or death) or receipt of services. The duration of LTSS needs estimates were restricted to adults
with severe needs, and duration of paid LTSS estimates were restricted to users of those services and supports. The analysis
classified individuals as having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS and had 2 or more ADL limitations or
SCI. ADLs include getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or showering, eating, and using the toilet.
Paid LTSS included nursing home care that lasted at least 90 days, paid home care, and residential care. The analysis counted
only LTSS received by adults with severe LTSS needs.




                                                  ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 19
                        TABLE 5. Distribution of Duration in Years of Severe LTSS
                           Needs after Age 65, by Personal Characteristics (%)
                      (older adults with severe LTSS needs or receiving paid LTSS)
                                     No More                                                   More                    More
                                                  2 to 4      4 to 6     6 to 8    8 to 10                   All
                                      Than 2                                                  Than 10                 Than 4
Sex
  Men                                      47          22         13           7          5           7         100         32
  Women                                    35          21         16          10          6          11         100         43
Race and Ethnicity
  NonHispanic White                        42          22         14           9          5           7         100         35
  NonHispanic Black                        33          19         16          10          8          16         100         50
  Hispanic                                 28          15         11          12          6          28         100         57
Education
  Not high school graduate                 36          22         15          10          6          11         100         42
  High school graduate only or
                                           43          20         14           9          5           9         100         37
  some college
  Bachelor’s degree or more                41          25         14           6          6           8         100         34
Financial Wealth
  Negative or zero                         34          19         15           8          7          17         100         47
  $1-$20,000                               39          23         14          10          5           9         100         37
  $20,001-$100,000                         42          22         17          10          5           5         100         37
  More than $100,000                       45          22         14           9          5           6         100         34
Nonhousing Wealth
  No more than $5,000                      34          19         15          10          7          15         100         47
  $5,001-$50,000                           38          23         14           9          5          10         100         38
  $50,001-$200,000                         43          21         15          10          4           7         100         36
  More than $200,000                       43          22         14           9          5           7         100         35
Household Income
  No more than $13,500                     38          20         14          10          7          12         100         43
  $12,5001-$20,000                         38          22         17           9          5          10         100         41
  $20,001-$40,000                          41          24         14           9          5           7         100         35
  More than $40,000                        45          20         12           9          5           8         100         34
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: Estimates were derived from hazard functions of time to the end of severe LTSS needs through permanent recovery or
death. The analysis classified individuals as having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS and had 2 or more
ADL limitations or SCI. ADLs include getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or showering, eating,
and using the toilet. Wealth and income were measured in constant 2014 dollars in the wave preceding the onset of severe LTSS
needs. We also adjusted household wealth and income for family size by dividing those measures by 1.41 when respondents
were married.




                                                 ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 20
               TABLE 6. Distribution of Duration in Years of Paid LTSS after Age 65 (%)
                   (by personal characteristics, older adults receiving paid LTSS)
                                     No More                                                    More                    More
                                                   2 to 4     4 to 6     6 to 8     8 to 10                   All
                                      Than 2                                                   Than 10                 Than 4
Sex
   Men                                    59          22           9          5          2           3          100         19
   Women                                  44          24          13          8          5           6          100         32
Race and Ethnicity
   NonHispanic White                      51          23          12          7          4           4          100         27
   NonHispanic Black                      44          22          15          8          4           8          100         35
   Hispanic                               32          17          10         13          6          22          100         51
Education
   Not high school graduate               48          23          12          8          4           6          100         30
   High school graduate only or
                                          50          22          12          7          5           4          100         28
   some college
   Bachelor’s degree or more              47          25          13          5          3           7          100         28
Financial Wealth
   Negative or zero                       44          22          10          7          6          10          100         33
   $1-$20,000                             48          22          13          8          3           7          100         31
   $20,001-$100,000                       52          24          12          6          3           2          100         23
   More than $100,000                     50          24          11          7          5           3          100         26
Nonhousing Wealth
   No more than $5,000                    42          23          11          8          5          11          100         35
   $5,001-$50,000                         47          23          13          8          4           6          100         31
   $50,001-$200,000                       53          23          11          7          4           2          100         24
   More than $200,000                     51          24          11          6          5           3          100         25
Household Income
   No more than $13,500                   46          22          11          8          5           8          100         32
   $12,5001-$20,000                       48          24          12          7          4           5          100         28
   $20,001-$40,000                        51          23          13          6          4           3          100         26
   More than $40,000                      52          33          11          7          4           4          100         26
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: Paid LTSS included nursing home care that lasted at least 90 days, paid home care, and residential care. Estimates
were derived from hazard functions of time to the end of paid LTSS (often because of death) for adults ages 65 and older
receiving paid LTSS. The analysis counted only LTSS received by adults with severe LTSS needs (2 or more ADL limitations or
SCI). ADLs included getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a room, bathing or showering, eating, and using the
toilet. Wealth and income were measured in constant 2014 dollars in the wave preceding the onset of severe LTSS needs. We
also adjusted household wealth and income for family size by dividing those measures by 1.41 when respondents were married.




                                                 ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 21
          TABLE 7. Incidence and Duration of Severe LTSS Needs and Paid LTSS by Type (%)
             (adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who report no more than 1 ADL limitation in 1993)
                                                            More                                             Duration in Years (%)
                                                                        Mean
                                                           Than 2                                Some, But
                                              Any (%)                  Number                                                             More
                                                           Years                      None        No More        2 to 4       4 to 6                   All
                                                                       of Years                                                          Than 6
                                                             (%)                                   Than 2
All Adults
Severe LTSS needs                                 72          37          2.2          28            35             18          11            9         100
Any paid LTSS                                     48          21          1.2          52            27             12           6            3         100
Paid home care                                    28           8          0.5          72            20              5           2            1         100
Residential care                                   4           2          0.1          96             3              1           0            0         100
Long-term nursing home care                       32          14          0.7          68             7              8           3            2         100
Long-term Medicaid-financed nursing
                                                  13           5          0.3          87             4              3           1            1         100
home care
Adults with Severe LTSS Needs
Severe LTSS needs                                100          52          3.0           0            48             25          15           12         100
Any paid LTSS                                     66          28          1.6          34            38             16           8            4         100
Paid home care                                    39          11          0.7          61            28              7           3            1         100
Residential care                                   6           2          0.1          94             4              1           0            1         100
Long-term nursing home care                       42          19          1.0          58             9             11           5            3         100
Long-term Medicaid-financed nursing
                                                  17           6          0.4          83             5              4           1            1         100
home care
Services Users
Any paid LTSS                                    100          43          2.4           0            57             25          12            6         100
Paid home care                                   100          28          1.8           0            72             19           7            2         100
Residential care                                 100          38          2.5           0            62             21           8           10         100
Long-term nursing home care                      100          43          2.3           0            21             25          10            8         100
Long-term Medicaid-financed nursing
                                                 100          38          2.1           0            28             25           9            4         100
home care
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: The analysis followed HRS respondents from 1993 to 2014. The sample was restricted to adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who reported no more than 1
ADL limitation in 1993 and were followed until death. Paid LTSS included nursing home stays of at least 90 days, paid home care, and residential care. The
analysis counted only LTSS received by adults with 2 or more ADL limitations or SCI. ADLs included getting in and out of bed, dressing, walking across a
room, bathing or showering, eating, and using the toilet.




                                                             ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 22
      TABLE 8. Incidence and Duration of Severe LTSS Needs by Personal Characteristics (%)
          (adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who report no more than 1 ADL limitation in 1993)
                                                           More                                             Duration in Years (%)
                                                                        Mean
                                                          Than 2                                Some, But
                                              Any (%)                  Number                                                             More
                                                          Years                      None        No More         2 to 4      4 to 6                   All
                                                                       of Years                                                          Than 6
                                                            (%)                                   Than 2
Sex
   Men                                            65          28            1.6            35           36          16            8            4        100
   Women                                          78          44            2.6            22           34          19           13           12        100
Marital Status in 1993
   Not married                                    77          42            2.5            23           34          19           13           10        100
   Married                                        70          33            1.9            30           36          17            9            7        100
Race and Ethnicity
   NonHispanic White                              72          36            2.0            28           36          18           11            7        100
   NonHispanic Black                              80          52            3.3            20           27          18           13           21        100
   Hispanic                                       77          44            2.8            23           32          16           10           18        100
Education
   Not high school graduate                       73          41            2.5            27           31          19           11           11        100
   High school graduate only or some
                                                  73          34            2.0            27           38          17           11            6        100
   college
   Bachelor’s degree or more                      68          34            1.8            32           34          19           10            5        100
Financial Wealth
   Negative or zero                               74          43            2.7            26           30          19            9           15        100
   $1-$20,000                                     74          40            2.3            26           34          18           13            9        100
   $20,001-$100,000                               72          37            2.0            28           35          20           11            6        100
   More than $100,000                             70          28            1.7            30           41          15            9            4        100
Nonhousing Wealth
   No more than $5,000                            76          46            2.9            24           30          19           11           16        100
   $5,001-$50,000                                 73          40            2.2            27           33          19           13            8        100
   $50,001-$200,000                               71          33            1.9            29           37          18           10            5        100
   More than $200,000                             70          30            1.8            30           39          16            9            5        100
Household Income
   No more than $13,500                           76          44            2.8            24           31          16           13           15        100
   $12,5001-$20,000                               72          40            2.2            28           32          20           12            8        100
   $20,001-$40,000                                73          35            2.0            27           38          18           10            7        100
   More than $40,000                              68          29            1.7            32           38          16            9            4        100
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: The analysis followed HRS respondents from 1993 to 2014. The sample was restricted to adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who reported no more than 1
ADL limitation in 1993 and were followed until death. The analysis classified individuals as having severe LTSS needs if they received paid or unpaid LTSS
and had 2 or more ADL limitations or SCI. The analysis counted only those nursing home stays that lasted at least 90 days. Wealth and income were
measured in constant 2014 dollars at the baseline 1993 interview. We also adjusted household wealth and income for family size by dividing those measures
by 1.41 when respondents were married.




                                                            ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 23
                TABLE 9. Probability of Receiving Any Paid LTSS before and after
                              Age 85 by Personal Characteristics (%)
           (adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who report no more than 1 ADL limitation in 1993)
                                                                                      More Than 2 Years
                                                          Any Paid LTSS
                                                                                         of Paid LTSS
                                                         Ever        By Age 85        Ever        By Age 85
All                                                       48             23            21             7
Sex
  Men                                                     37             19               11              4
  Women                                                   57             27               28             10
Marital Status in 1993
  Not married                                             55             28               26             10
  Married                                                 43             20               18              5
Race and Ethnicity
  NonHispanic White                                       48             22               19              7
  NonHispanic Black                                       53             32               30             12
  Hispanic                                                48             26               24             12
Education
  Not high school graduate                                47             26               21              9
  High school graduate only or some college               49             22               21              6
  Bachelor’s degree or more                               48             22               20              6
Financial Wealth
  Negative or zero                                        46             27               22              8
  $1-$20,000                                              48             26               22             10
  $20,001-$100,000                                        50             20               21              6
  More than $100,000                                      48             20               16              4
Nonhousing Wealth
  No more than $5,000                                     49             31               23             12
  $5,001-$50,000                                          48             24               21              7
  $50,001-$200,000                                        48             19               21              6
  More than $200,000                                      47             19               17              5
Household Income
  No more than $13,500                                    47             29               23             12
  $12,5001-$20,000                                        48             23               22              8
  $20,001-$40,000                                         49             22               20              6
  More than $40,000                                       47             20               18              5
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: The analysis followed HRS respondents from 1993 to 2014. The sample was restricted to adults ages
70-79 in 1993 who reported no more than 1 ADL limitation in 1993 and were followed until death. See note to
Table 8 for more details.




                                           ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 24
     TABLE 10. Probability of Receiving Nursing Home Care by Personal Characteristics (%)
         (adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who report no more than 1 ADL limitations in 1993)
                                                                                               At Least         More Than
                                                      At Least 90
                                   At Least 90                           More Than 2          90 Days of        2 Years of
                                                     Days of Care
                                  Days of Care                           Years of Care        Medicaid-         Medicaid-
                                                      by Age 85
                                                                                            Financed Care     Financed Care
All                                    32                 15                    14                13                5
Sex
  Men                                  23                 12                    7                   6                   2
  Women                                40                 17                    19                 17                   7
Marital Status in 1993
  Not married                          39                 19                    19                 19                   7
  Married                              28                 12                    11                  9                   3
Race and Ethnicity
  NonHispanic White                    33                 15                    14                 12                   4
  NonHispanic Black                    32                 19                    16                 21                   9
  Hispanic                             22                 10                    12                 13                   6
Education
  Not high school graduate             30                 16                    13                 17                   6
  High school graduate only
                                       35                 14                    15                 12                   4
  or some college
  Bachelor’s degree or more            29                 14                    11                  4                   3
Financial Wealth
  Negative or zero                     31                 17                    14                 18                   7
  $1-$20,000                           36                 18                    16                 16                   6
  $20,001-$100,000                     33                 11                    14                 12                   4
  More than $100,000                   29                 12                    11                  3                   1
Nonhousing Wealth
  No more than $5,000                  33                 21                    16                 23                   10
  $5,001-$50,000                       36                 16                    15                 17                   6
  $50,001-$200,000                     32                 12                    14                  9                   3
  More than $200,000                   28                 11                    11                  3                   1
Household Income
  No more than $13,500                 31                 17                    15                 20                   9
  $12,5001-$20,000                     35                 16                    15                 18                   6
  $20,001-$40,000                      33                 14                    14                  9                   3
  More than $40,000                    28                 12                    12                  5                   2
SOURCE: Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: The analysis followed HRS respondents from 1993 to 2014. The sample was restricted to adults ages 70-79 in 1993
who reported no more than 1 ADL limitation in 1993 and were followed until death. See note to Table 8 for more details.



         TABLE 11. Duration of Nursing Home Care by Receipt of Medicaid-Financed Care
              (adults ages 70-79 in 1993 who report no more than 1 ADL limitation
                             in 1993 and later enter a nursing home)
                                                             Distribution of Duration of Nursing Home Care
                                   Mean                                         More Than       More Than
                                 Number of                                       1 Year, No     2 Years, No       More Than
                                                 90-180 Days  181-365 Days
                                   Years                                        More Than       More Than          4 Years
                                                                                  2 Years         4 Years
All                                 2.3               21            16               21              25               18
Any Medicaid-Financed Nursing Home Care
  Yes                               3.2               8               11                23             28             30
  No                                1.7              29               18                19             23             10
SOURCE; Author’s estimates from the HRS.
NOTES: The analysis followed HRS respondents from 1993 to 2014. The sample was restricted to adults ages 70-79 in 1993
who reported no more than 1 ADL limitation in 1993 and were followed until death. Paid LTSS included nursing home stays of at
least 90 days.




                                                 ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 25
This Research Brief, written by Richard W. Johnson from Urban Institute, provides new evidence on the
lifetime risk that older adults will need LTSS and receive paid services and supports. Using longitudinal
household survey data from 1995 to 2014 from the Health and Retirement Study, we estimated the
likelihood that adults ever development disabilities after age 65 and receive paid care, including paid
home care, residential care (such as assisted living), nursing home care, and Medicaid-financed nursing
home care, and the duration of need and care spells. Our results show that 70% of adults who survive to
age 65 develop severe LTSS needs before they die and 48% receive some paid care over their lifetime.
Many older people with severe LTSS needs rely exclusively on family and unpaid caregivers, and most
paid care episodes are relatively short. Only 24% of older adults receive more than 2 years of paid LTSS
care, and only 15% spend more than 2 years in a nursing home. However, the lifetime risk of receiving
paid care is not evenly distributed across the population. Lengthy spells of severe LTSS needs and paid
care are much more common among older adults with few financial resources than their wealthier
counterparts.

The opinions and views expressed in this report are those of the authors. They do not reflect the views of
the Department of Health and Human Services, the contractor or any other funding organization. This
report was completed and submitted on April 2017.

This brief was prepared under contract #HHSP23320100025W1 between the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Office of Disability,
Aging and Long-Term Care Policy (DALTCP) and the Urban Institute. For additional information about
this subject, you can visit https://aspe.hhs.gov/ or contact the ASPE/DALTCP Project Officers, John
Drabek and Pamela Doty, at HHS/ASPE/DALTCP, Room 424E, H.H. Humphrey Building, 200
Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20201, John.Drabek@hhs.gov, Pamela.Doty@hhs.gov.



                                         ASPE RESEARCH BRIEF | 26
