National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA):
          Methodology Paper, 2024
                          Definitions, Sources, and Methods

                                 Last Updated: January 2026
                          National Health Expenditures for 1960-2024


                                National Health Statistics Group
                                      Office of the Actuary
                            Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services


                                               Table of Contents

Introduction: About the U.S. National Health Expenditure Accounts........................... 2
How is Health Care Spending Defined and Organized in the NHEA? ............................ 4
Definitions, Sources, and Methods by NHEA Category ............................................... 7
  Medical Services ........................................................................................................ 7
  Medical Goods......................................................................................................... 11
  Payers and Programs for Medical Services and Goods ................................................ 13
  Categories Added at the Health Consumption Expenditures Aggregation Level ............ 23
  Categories Added at the National Health Expenditures Aggregation Level .................... 26
NHEA by Type of Sponsor ....................................................................................... 28
Health Insurance Enrollment and the Uninsured ..................................................... 33
Deflating National Health Expenditures .................................................................. 35
  Deflators Used in the Personal Health Care Price Index .............................................. 36
  Deflators Used in the Non-Personal Health Care Price Index ....................................... 37
References ............................................................................................................ 39
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Introduction: About the U.S. National Health Expenditure Accounts
Since 1964, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1 and its predecessor agencies have
                                                                  0F




published an annual series of data presenting total national health expenditures (NHE). These estimates,
termed the National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA), are compiled with the goal of measuring the total
annual dollar amount of health care consumption in the U.S., as well as the dollar amount invested in
medical sector structures and equipment and non-commercial research to procure health services in the
future.

The NHEA are generally compatible with a production-based accounting structure such as the Bureau of
Economic Analysis’ National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), 2 but include a more complete picture of
                                                                       1F




the health care sector. 3 Using an expenditures approach to national economic accounting, the NHEA
                       2F




identifies all final consumption of health care goods and services as well as investment in a given year that is
purchased or provided by direct or third-party payments and programs.

Three primary characteristics of the NHEA flow from this framework. First, the NHEA are comprehensive
because they contain all of the main components of the health care system within a unified mutually
exclusive and exhaustive structure. Second, the NHEA are multidimensional, encompassing not only
expenditures for medical goods and services, but also the payers and programs that finance these
expenditures. Third, the NHEA are consistent because they apply a common set of definitions that allow
comparisons among categories and over time.

To keep the NHEA accurate and relevant, the scope, methods, and data sources used are periodically
reexamined. Every five years, the NHEA undergoes a comprehensive revision that includes the incorporation
of newly available source data, methodological and definitional changes, and the benchmarking of estimates
from the U.S. Census Bureau’s quinquennial Economic Census (available for years ending in “2” and “7”).
During these comprehensive revisions, the entire NHEA time series (1960-forward) is evaluated and may be
revised. The most recent comprehensive revision is reflected in the 2024 vintage of the NHEA. Please visit
the following website for more information regarding these changes:

               https://www.cms.gov/files/document/summary-benchmark-changes-2024.pdf

The NHEA are not limited to national level, historical estimates of health spending and health insurance
enrollment. Selected additional NHEA products include:

    •   Health care expenditure projections: 4 Historical NHEA estimates provide a basis for projections of
                                              3F




        future health care expenditures. Each year following the release of the historical NHEA data, the
        Office of the Actuary releases updated 10-year projections of health care expenditures that
        incorporate updated assumptions about demographic and economic factors, as well as inflation
        rates and other economic information. By projecting the likely future trends in health care spending
        under current law, these models provide key information to legislators, research analysts, academic
        professionals, and the public so that they can make informed decisions.

    •   Health care expenditures by age and sex: 5 Historical health spending is also estimated by age and
                                                   4F




        sex for selected years from 2002 through 2020. These estimates reflect personal health care
        spending by type of good or services and by source of funding (private health insurance, Medicare,
        Medicaid, our-of-pocket, and all other payers and programs) for five age groups: 0-18, 19-4, 45-64,
        65-84, and 85 and over for males and females.

    •    Health care expenditures by state of provider 6 and state of residence: 7 , State level health accounts
                                                        5F                      6F




        by state of provider (1980 through 2020) reflect state level expenditures by the type of establishment
        delivering care (hospitals, physicians and clinics, nursing homes, etc.) and for medical products
        (prescription drugs, over-the-counter medicines and sundries, and durable medical equipment).
        These estimates are useful in measuring the role of health spending in state economies and allow for
        state and regional comparisons over time. Health care expenditures by state of residence (available
        for 1991 through 2020) represent adjusted state of provider expenditures that reflect health spending

                                                        2
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

        for the state in which the patient resides (they capture the migration patterns associated with those
        who cross state borders to receive care). Because health spending by state of residence is
        consistent with state population and/or health insurance enrollment counts, it is the only set of
        state-level estimates in which it is appropriate to calculate health spending per person by state.

NHEA data can be and has been used to study numerous topics related to the health care sector. Examples
include:

    •   Health care expenditures as a proportion of GDP. Within the NHEA, the amount of health care goods
        and services produced relative to the amount of all goods and services produced represents the
        share of the nation’s total production that is attributed to health care. The amount of economic
        resources devoted to the production of health care also represents the opportunity cost of health
        care to society, in that such resources cannot be applied to the production of any other types of
        goods and services.

    •   Health care expenditures by payers and programs. The NHEA allows for the analysis of the share and
        magnitude of various types of health care payers and programs including health insurance (such as
        private health insurance, Medicare, and Medicaid) consumer out-of-pocket payments, and other
        third-party payers and programs.

    •   Health care expenditures for various types of goods and services. The NHEA present the amount of
        annual consumption of health care goods and services produced by various health care
        establishments in the U.S and are useful in analyzing the changing mix of medical services and
        products consumed.

    •   Health care expenditures by type of sponsor. The NHEA is aligned to produce estimates of spending
        by type of sponsor, or the businesses, households, governments, and other private revenues that are
        ultimately responsible for financing health care expenditures and are the sponsors of private health
        insurance premiums, out-of-pocket spending, and government program expenditures. These
        estimates, combined with measures of available resources used to pay for health care, can help to
        identify health care financing pressures and the impact of changes in health care costs.

    •   Health care policy changes. The comprehensive and integrated structure of the NHEA creates an
        ideal tool for evaluating changes to the health care system such as the mix of the insured and
        uninsured, the distribution of all direct and third-party payers and programs, the consumption of
        health care goods and services, and impacts of legislation.




                                                      3
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


How is Health Care Spending Defined and Organized in the NHEA?
The NHEA tabulate aggregate health care spending in the United States on three major dimensions: spending
by medical service and/or good; by payer and/or program; and by sponsor (or source of financing).

Exhibit 1 provides a visualization of the structure and organization of the NHEA.

Personal health care (PHC) expenditures, the internal box in Exhibit 1, represent all revenues received by
health care providers and retail establishments for the provision of medical goods and services as well as all
non-patient and non-operating revenue, grants, subsidies, and philanthropy received by health care
providers.

Health consumption expenditures (HCE) equal PHC spending plus spending for government public health
activity, government administration, and non-medical insurance expenditures.

National health expenditures (NHE) equal HCE plus investment, which is the sum of medical sector
purchases of structures and equipment and expenditures for non-commercial medical research.

Exhibit 1: Structure of the NHEA by Goods and Services

 National Health Expenditures (NHE)
 equals HCE plus Investment
    Health Consumption Expenditures (HCE)
    equals PHC plus Government Administration, Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures, Public
    Health Activities
       Personal Health Care (PHC)
           Hospital Care
           Physician and Clinical Services
           Other Professional Services
           Dental Services
           Other Health, Residential, and Personal Care
           Home Health Care
           Nursing Care Facilities and Continuing Care
             Retirement Communities
           Prescription Drugs
           Other Non-Durable Medical Products
          Durable Medical Equipment
        Government Administration
        Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures
        Public Health Activities
    Investment
       Non-Commercial Research
        Structures and Equipment

Source: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health Statistics Group.




                                                           4
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Industry Classification and Data Sources for Medical Services and Goods
In the NHEA, health care spending is classified by type of establishment. Services are classified by the 2022
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). 8 Goods are classified according to the product
                                                                        7F




codes used by the U.S. Census Bureau. Exhibit 2 shows the mapping of NAICS codes to NHEA categories.
Exhibit 2: NAICS Structure for the Health Care Services Crosswalk to NHEA
          NAICS Structure                                                    NHEA Categories
62        Health Care and Social Assistance
621       Ambulatory Health Care Services
6211      Offices of Physicians                                              Physician and clinical services
6212      Offices of Dentists                                                Dental Services
6213      Offices of Other Health Practitioners                              Other professional services/durable medical equipment
62131     Offices of Chiropractors                                           Other professional services
62132     Offices of Optometrists                                            Other professional services/durable medical equipment
62133     Offices of Mental Health Practitioners (except Physicians)         Other professional services
62134     Offices of Physical, Occupational and Speech Therapists, and       Other professional services
          Audiologists
62139     Offices of All Other Health Practitioners                          Other professional services
621391    Offices of Podiatrists                                             Other professional services
621399    Offices of All Other Miscellaneous Health Practitioners            Other professional services
6214      Outpatient Care Centers                                            Physician and clinical services
62141     Family Planning Centers                                            Physician and clinical services
62142     Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse Centers               Physician and clinical services
62149     Other Outpatient Care Centers                                      Physician and clinical services
621491    HMO Medical Centers                                                Physician and clinical services
621492    Kidney Dialysis Centers                                            Physician and clinical services
621493    Freestanding Ambulatory Surgical and Emergency Centers             Physician and clinical services
621498    All Other Outpatient Care Centers                                  Physician and clinical services
6215      Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories                                Physician and clinical services
621511    Medical Laboratories                                               Physician and clinical services
621512    Diagnostic Imaging Centers                                         Physician and clinical services
6216      Home Health Care Services                                          Home health care
6219      Other Ambulatory Health Care Services                              Other health, residential, and personal care (partial)
62191     Ambulance Services                                                 Other health, residential, and personal care
622       Hospitals                                                          Hospital care
6221      General Medical and Surgical Hospitals                             Hospital care
6222      Psychiatric and Substance Abuse Hospitals                          Hospital care
6223      Specialty (except Psychiatric and Substance Abuse) Hospitals Hospital care
623       Nursing and Residential Care Facilities                            Nursing home and residential care facilities/other health,
                                                                             residential, and personal care
6231      Nursing Care Facilities (Skilled Nursing Facilities)               Nursing care facilities and continuing care retirement
                                                                             communities
6232      Residential Intellectual and Developmental Disability, Mental      Other health, residential, and personal care
          Health and Substance Abuse Facilities
62321     Residential Intellectual and Developmental Disability Facilities Other health, residential, and personal care
62322     Residential Mental Health and Substance Abuse Facilities           Other health, residential, and personal care
6233      Continuing Care Retirement Communities and Assisted Living         Nursing care facilities and continuing care retirement
          Facilities for the Elderly                                         communities (only 623311)
62331     Continuing Care Retirement Communities and Assisted Living         Nursing care facilities and continuing care retirement
          Facilities for the Elderly                                         communities (only 623311)
623311    Continuing Care Retirement Communities                             Nursing care facilities and continuing care retirement
                                                                             communities
NOTE: The following codes within NAICS 62 are out-of-scope for the NHEA: 62199, 621991, 621999, 623312, 6239.



                                                                    5
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Exhibit 3 below identifies the primary data sources and methodologies used to estimate spending for the
NHE services and goods categories. U.S. Census Bureau data sources, such as the Economic Census (EC)
and the Service Annual Survey (SAS) (which are also classified by NAICS code), are a primary input to NHE
service spending totals. For sources of funding estimates related to each service or good, similar data
sources and methods are used. For Medicare, Medicaid, and other third-party payers and programs, data is
used that originate directly from public programs or from the Budget of the U.S. Government. For private
health insurance, out-of-pocket, and other private revenues, expenditures by type of service or good are
distributed using survey data, such as the SAS and Quarterly Services Survey (QSS)after known program
spending (Medicare, Medicaid, and other third-party payers and programs) is removed.

Exhibit 3: An Overview of Data Sources and Methodology Used in the NHEA
                                                                                                                                 Other
                                                                                                                                 Third-Party
                                                                                        Other                                    Payers and
Service/Good:                            Total Spending         PHI         OOP         Private    Medicare         Medicaid     Programs
Hospital Care                            QSS, SAS, EC, and       Residual, distributed using the
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




                                         AHA                               SAS, QSS
Physician and Clinical Services          QSS, SAS and EC         Residual, distributed using the
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




                                                                           SAS, QSS
Other Professional Services              QSS, SAS and EC         Residual, distributed using the
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




                                                                           SAS, QSS
Dental Services                          QSS, SAS and EC         Residual, distributed using the
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




                                                                           SAS, QSS
Other Health, Residential, and           QSS, SAS, EC,                SAS and other data            Trustees        CMS-64s      Program or
Personal Care                            Program or Budget                                           Report,                       Budget
                                         data, and other data                                      Summary                          Data
                                                                                                    Claims,
                                                                                                      and
                                                                                                   Medicare
                                                                                                   Advantage
                                                                                                   Bid Pricing
                                                                                                   Tool data
Home Health Care                         QSS, SAS and EC         Residual, distributed using the
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




                                                                            SAS, QSS
Nursing Care Facilities and Continuing QSS, SAS and EC           Residual, distributed using the
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




Care Retirement Communities                                                 SAS, QSS
Prescription Drugs                     CRT and IQVIA Health      Residual, distributed     N/A
                                                                                                      Claims Data      CMS-64s     Program or Budget Data




                                                                 using data from CMS
                                                                  and IQVIA Health
Durable Medical Equipment                I-O and EC                    PCE, CE, and MEPS                            MAX/MSIS
                                                                                                      Claims Data                  Program or Budget Data




Other Non-durable Medical Products       PCE                       N/A                     N/A                        N/A
                                                                                                      Claims Data                  Program or Budget Data




Key of terms:
EC = The U.S. Census Bureau's Economic Census, available for years ending in 2 and 7
Other data = Includes data from the Journal of Emergency Medical Services, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Mercer Survey for onsite health
care, and Kaiser Health Research and Educational Trust (HRET) survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits
SAS = The U.S. Census Bureau's Service Annual Survey. This survey was discontinued with the 2022 data and will be replaced with the
Annual Integrated Economic Survey (AIES) with 2023 data.
QSS = The U.S. Census Bureau’s Quarterly Services Survey.
IQVIA = IQVIA's National Prescription Audit and Method of Payment Report
CMS = Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
CRT = The U.S. Census Bureau's Census of Retail Trade, available for years ending in 2 and 7
I-O = The Bureau of Economic Analysis' Input-Output Accounts, available for years ending in 2 and 7
CE = The Bureau of Labor Statistics' Consumer Expenditure Survey
MEPS = The Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research's Medical Expenditure Panel Survey
PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures
MAX/MSIS = Medicaid Analytic eXtract system and Medicaid Statistical Information Statistics
Source: The National Health Statistics Group, Office of the Actuary, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services




                                                                   6
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Definitions, Sources, and Methods by NHEA Category

Medical Services

Hospital Care
Definition: Expenditures for hospital care include revenue received by all U.S. hospitals for all services
rendered (NAICS 622). This includes net patient revenues (gross charges less contractual adjustments, bad
debts, and charity care). It also includes government tax appropriations, non-patient operating revenue such
as receipts from cafeterias, gift shops and parking lots, and non-operating revenue, such as interest income,
contributions, and grants.

Other hospital-based services, such as inpatient pharmacy, hospital-based nursing home care, hospital-
based home health care and fees for any other services billed by the hospital such as hospice are also
included in the hospital care category.

Data Sources: Current hospital care revenue data sources include the Economic Census (EC), Services
Annual Survey (SAS), and the Quarterly Servies Survey (QSS), all compiled by the Bureau of the Census. For
federal hospital spending, data sources include the President’s Budget (Office of Management and Budget)
as well as budget information from the Department of Veterans Affairs and Indian Health Services. Hospital
care spending estimates for 1960-2007 were estimated based on American Hospital Association (AHA)
annual survey data.

Methods: Hospital Care spending levels are benchmarked to the 2012 and 2017 Economic Census 9 and  8F




interpolated and extrapolated using growth derived from the revenue trends in the Service Annual Survey, 10
                                                                                                         9F




the American Hospital Association’s (AHA) Annual Survey of Hospitals 11 (through 2021) and the Quarterly
                                                                      10F




Services Survey. 12 Estimates of hospital spending from 1960-2007 are benchmarked to the AHA’s Annual
                11F




Survey.

Total federal hospital spending is calculated as the sum of expenditures for services provided at Department
of Veterans Affairs hospitals, Department of Defense hospitals, Indian Health Service hospitals, and other
federal hospitals.

Physician and Clinical Services
Definition: In the NHEA the physicians and clinical services category includes Offices of Physicians
[including Doctors of Medicine (M.D.) and Doctors of Osteopathy (D.O.) (NAICS 6211)] and outpatient care
centers (NAICS 6214), plus the portion of medical and diagnostic laboratories services that are billed
independently by the laboratories (a portion of NAICS 6215).

Data Sources: Statistics compiled and published by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) (1960-1987), data
from the Services Annual Survey (SAS), compiled by the Bureau of the Census, trends from the Quarterly
Servies Survey (QSS).

Methods: For employer-based establishments, physician, clinical, and independently billing medical
laboratory services are benchmarked to business receipts of private taxable and tax-exempt firms collected
in the U.S. Census Bureau’s quinquennial Economic Census (EC).9 Information from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s Service Annual Survey10 is used to interpolate between the EC benchmark years and to extrapolate
to later periods. Receipts of non-employer taxable firms are then added to the revenue for employer-based
taxable and tax-exempt firms to estimate calendar year expenditures.

A subtraction is made to physician and clinical service expenditures to remove revenue received from other
providers including professional fees paid to physicians by hospitals, since these fees are included in
hospital expenditures.



                                                      7
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

The services of physicians working under salary for a hospital, nursing home, or other type of health care
establishment are reported with expenditures for that service. For example, care rendered by hospital
residents and interns at a hospital is included in the hospital services estimate and excluded from the
physician and clinical services estimates. Likewise, physicians’ professional fees received from
arrangements with hospitals, including minimum guaranteed income, percentage of departmental billing,
and bonuses would be excluded from the physician and clinical services estimates.

Estimates of spending for government-run Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense, and
Indian Health Service clinics and the Coast Guard Academy Clinic are added to physician and clinical
services expenditures. The SAS does not collect data for government facilities in this industry.

For estimates prior to 1987 expenditures for physician and clinical services were estimated primarily using
business receipts for sole proprietorships, partnerships, and incorporated practices compiled and published
by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in its Statistics of Income publication. 13
                                                                           12F




Dental Services
Definition: Dental services expenditures cover services provided by licensed dental practitioners, including
Doctor of Dental Medicine (D.M.D.), Doctors of Dental Surgery (D.D.S.), or Doctors of Dental Science
(D.D.Sc.) that are classified under NAICS 6212: Offices of Dentists. These include preventive, cosmetic,
emergency, and specialized treatments delivered in private practices, group practices, hospitals, or HMO
medical centers.

Data Sources: The primary data sources for estimates of dental spending are the U.S. Census Bureau’s
Service Annual Survey (SAS), the Quarterly Services Survey (QSS), and the Economic Census (EC). For 1960-
1987, dental services spending estimates were based on IRS data.

Methods: Total dental services expenditures are calculated by summing dental services revenue for
employer and non-employer firms from the Service Annual Survey. Estimates of dental services provided in
Department of Defense (DOD) facilities are then added to arrive at the final total.

For 2023 and 2024, total levels for employer firms are derived using annual trend rates from the Quarterly
Services Survey (QSS). Spending from non-employers are from the US Census Bureau’s Nonemployer
Statistics program.

Other Professional Services
Definition: The other professional services category includes spending provided in establishments operated
by health practitioners other than physicians (MDs) and dentists (DDS, DMD, and DDSc). This includes
services provided in offices of chiropractors (NAICS 621310), offices of optometrists (NAICS 621320), offices
of mental health practitioners (except physicians) (NAICS 621330), offices of physical, occupational and
speech therapists, and audiologists (NAICS 621340), offices of podiatrists (NAICS 621391), and offices of all
other miscellaneous health practitioners (NAICS 621399).

Data Sources: Spending for employer establishments is developed from revenue estimates from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Service Annual Survey, Quarterly Services Survey, and the Economic Census. Spending
from non-employers are from the US Census Bureau’s Nonemployer Statistics program. In the years before
Census data became available, estimates were derived using information from the IRS and the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS).

Methods: Total spending estimates are derived by summing the revenue of employer and non-employer
firms, with an adjustment to remove a portion of optometrist revenue for eyeglasses, contact lenses, and
other optical goods, as that spending is included in durable medical equipment. The percentage of optical
goods from optometric offices is estimated from North American Product Classification System (NAPCS)
data from the Economic Census.



                                                      8
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Other health, residential, and personal care
Definition: The other health, residential, and personal care category includes spending for services provided
in non-traditional settings including residential mental health and substance abuse facilities, residential
intellectual and developmental disability facilities, Medicaid home and community-based waivers, school
health, worksite health care, and some ambulance services.
Data Sources: The data sources used are specific to each of the underlying services/settings:

    •   Residential facilities – NAICS 6232 employer and non-employer data from U.S. Census Bureau
        Service Annual Survey (SAS), Medicaid program data for Intermediate Care Facilities for individuals
        with Intellectual Disabilities (ICFs/IID), and program data from DOD, VA, and SAMSHA.
    •   Ambulance Services – NAICS 62191 employer and non-employer data from the U.S. Census Bureau
        Service Annual Survey and data from the Journal of Emergency Medical Services.
    •   Worksite Health Care – Survey of employer sponsors health plans, Consumer Price index for medical
        services and physicians (BLS), a Mercer Survey of onsite health care, and the Kaiser Family
        Foundation/Health Research and Educational Trust Survey of Employer Sponsored Health Benefits.
    •   Other care provided in non-traditional settings
            o Medicaid home and Community Based Waivers - Medicaid Program Data
            o School health - National Public Education Financial Survey, Public and Private school
                 enrollment (National Center for Education Statistics).
Methods: Expenditures for private establishments that provide residential mental health and substance
abuse and residential intellectual and developmental disability services are estimated using business
receipts of private taxable and tax-exempt firms collected in the Economic Census. Information from the SAS
is used to interpolate between the EC benchmark years and to extrapolate to later periods. Public facility
expenditures are estimates using program data from Medicaid and the Veterans Administration as well as
estimates of state and local facility revenues based on wage data (BLS) and are added to total expenditures
of private establishments.

Expenditures for ambulance services provided by private establishments are estimated using business
receipts of private taxable and tax-exempt firms collected in the Economic Census. Information from the SAS
is used to interpolate between the EC benchmark years and to extrapolate to later periods. Public payments
(Medicare, Medicaid, and General Assistance) to government operated establishments are estimated from
program data as well information from the Journal of Emergency Medical Services. 14 While the total
                                                                                  13F




ambulance expenditures reflect public payments to government operated establishments and revenue
received by private establishments, it does exclude private payment to government operated establishments
due to a lack of source data.

The worksite healthcare estimate is derived from various data sources. A 1984 survey of employer-sponsored
health plans 15 produced an estimated cost per employee with access to covered services in 1984, which was
                 14F




extrapolated back to 1960 and forward to current periods using national employment data and the Consumer
Price Index 16 for medical services and physicians from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Additional information
           15F




from the Mercer Survey 17 for onsite health care and the Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research and
                       16F




Educational Trust Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits 18 provides data on the number of
                                                                 17F




employees that are provided with worksite health care services.
Expenditures for medical care provided in non-traditional settings includes care provided in community
centers, senior citizens centers, schools, and military field stations. One of the largest categories of
government spending for this category is home and community-based waiver programs under Medicaid. In
these programs, states may apply for waivers in order to provide care to beneficiaries who would otherwise
require long-term inpatient care in a hospital or nursing home. Examples of types of services provided under
these waivers include rehabilitation, respite care, and environmental modifications. This care is frequently
delivered in community centers and senior citizens centers and through home visits by various kinds of
medical and non-medical personnel. School health expenditures are estimated using data from the National


                                                      9
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Public Education Financial Survey 19 supplemented with enrollment estimates for both public and private
                                        18F




schools from the National Center for Education Statistics. 20
                                                            19F




Home Health Care
Definition: The home health care component of the NHEA measures annual expenditures for skilled nursing,
hospice, and other ancillary services delivered in the home by freestanding home health agencies (HHAs) as
classified in NAICS category 6216.

Spending associated with hospital-based HHAs are classified with hospitals (NAICS 622) and are therefore
included with hospital care expenditures.

Data Sources: Estimates of home health expenditure are developed from revenue data from the U.S. Census
Bureau’s Economic Census, Service Annual Survey, and Quarterly Services Survey. These data are
supplemented with Medicare Provider Analysis and Review data 21 (for 1988 through 2014) and Chronic
                                                                        20F




Conditions Data Warehouse data 22 (for 2015 forward) to estimate revenue for government-owned HHAs.
                                  21F




Before the Census data became available, estimates were based on Medicare cost report data and survey
data from the National League for Nursing.

Methods: For employer-based establishments, estimates of freestanding home health spending starting in
1987 and for years ending in 2 and 7 are based on business receipts of private taxable and tax-exempt firms
collected in the U.S. Census Bureau’s quinquennial Economic Census (EC). 9 Information from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Service Annual Survey10 is used to interpolate between the EC benchmark years until 2022,
and trends from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Quarterly Services Survey12 are used to extrapolate to later
periods. Receipts of non-employer taxable firms are then added to the revenue for employer-based taxable
and tax-exempt firms to estimate calendar year expenditures for home health care services.

Revenue for government-owned HHAs are estimated by calculating an annual adjustment factor using a ratio
of Medicare reimbursements for government-owned freestanding HHAs to Medicare reimbursements for all
privately owned freestanding HHAs, which are obtained using tabulations from the Medicare Provider
Analysis and Review database. This ratio, multiplied by Census receipts, produces an estimate of revenue for
freestanding government facilities, which is then added to the receipts for private establishments.

Freestanding home health expenditures for 1967 through 1987 were primarily based on data available from
the Medicare and Medicaid programs. In the mid-1970s, analysis of Medicare cost report data from home
health agencies that were not part of a hospital or nursing home indicated that agency costs for services,
medical equipment, and supplies provided to Medicare patients represented approximately 50 percent of
total agency costs. 23 Examination of annual data for 1981-84 verified Medicare’s 50-percent share.
                   22F




Estimates of spending for home health care from 1960 through 1966 were obtained from information
reported by a sample of voluntary public health nursing agencies in surveys conducted by the National
League for Nursing in 1958, 1963, and 1967. These survey data on total agency income and income from
patient fees were weighted to estimate income of all voluntary public health nursing agencies and then
estimated for each non-survey year between 1958 and 1968. 24      23F




Nursing Care Facilities and Continuing Care Retirement Communities
Definition: The nursing care facilities and continuing care retirement communities category of the NHEA
includes freestanding facilities that are primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing, rehabilitative, and
continuous personal care services to persons requiring nursing care (NAICS 6231) and continuing care
retirement communities with on-site nursing care facilities (NAICS 623311).

In the NHEA, hospital-based nursing home care is included with hospital care expenditures (NAICS 622).

Data Sources: Estimates of expenditures for nursing care facilities and continuing care retirement
communities are developed from revenue data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Economic Census, Service
Annual Survey, and Quarterly Services Survey. Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Quarterly


                                                       10
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) 25 is used in the estimation of expenditures for state and local
                                                 24F




government nursing facilities, while spending for nursing facilities operated by the Veterans Administration
(VA) are based on VA program data.

Methods: Estimates of expenditures for care received in private freestanding nursing homes for the years
ending in 2 and 7 starting in 1977 are based on business receipts of service establishments from the U.S.
Census Bureau’s quinquennial Economic Census (EC).9 Information from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Service
Annual Survey10 is used to interpolate between the EC benchmark years and extrapolate to later periods. For
state and local nursing facilities, BLS wages and salaries are converted to estimated revenues using a ratio of
government wages to revenues, which is based on private wage and revenue data from the EC as a proxy.
Government outlays for care provided in nursing facilities operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs are
added to the private establishment estimates detailed above.

Estimates of freestanding nursing home spending prior to 1977 are based on total nursing home expenditures
from the National Center for Health Statistics’ estimates of average revenue per day for all facilities providing
some nursing care. 26 The estimates were interpolated and extrapolated using employee work hours for
                   25F




nursing and personal care facilities 27 multiplied by the growth in skilled nursing facility input prices. 28
                                    26F                                                               27F




Medical Goods

Prescription Drugs
Definition: The retail prescription drugs category includes retail sales of human-use, dosage-form drugs,
biological drugs, and diagnostic products that are available only by a prescription. These include retail
prescription drug purchases that occur in pharmacies and drug stores (including both chain and
independent), supermarkets and other grocery store pharmacies, mail-order and other direct-selling
establishments, department stores, warehouse clubs and supercenters, and all other general mass-
merchandising establishments.

Data Sources: Prescription drug purchases from these retail establishments are based on data from the
quinquennial Census of Retail Trade (CRT) 29 and from annual data purchased from IQVIA. 30
                                           28F                                              29F




Methods: In benchmark years (years ending in 2 or 7), retail prescription drug expenditures are based on the
Census of Retail Trade, Merchandise Line Sales for pharmacies and drug retailers, warehouse clubs and
supercenters, and supermarkets and other grocery retailers. Added to the Census of Retail Trade data are
estimates of non-employer receipts for sales of prescription drugs in pharmacies and drug stores. In
addition, estimates for government-run mail order facilities as well as estimates for state-specific sales taxes
on prescription drugs are added to total spending estimates in benchmark years. To interpolate between
benchmark years and extrapolate to later periods, information from the IQVIA National Prescription Audit and
the Method of Payment Report30 are used.

Next, the prescription drug estimates are adjusted to account for manufacturers’ rebates that reduce
insurers’ net payments for drugs. Providers and insurers who are responsible for the purchase of large
volumes of drugs have been able to negotiate rebates with manufacturers for the use of specific drugs.
Rebates received by providers such as hospitals do not require an adjustment because rebate savings are
received directly by hospitals whose revenues are used to measure hospital spending. In retail purchases of
prescription drugs, however, the retail outlet is not a party to the rebate transaction that takes place between
the insurer who pays the retail outlet and the manufacturer that produces the drug. Because the NHEA
estimates of prescription drugs are based on retail sales data at the pharmacy level, a reduction to account
for manufacturers’ rebates must be made to total drug spending and to third-party payments to retail
pharmacies to avoid over-estimation of prescription drug spending. Administrative data is used to estimate
rebates for programs run by the federal and state and local governments. For private health insurance (PHI),
we estimate rebates using data from the Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Data and System Resources public use




                                                       11
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

file. 31 Additionally, retail prescription drug spending in the NHEA is net of any rebates or discounts given by
   30F




pharmacies.

Other Non-Durable Medical Products
Definition: Other non-durable medical products include retail sales of non-prescription drugs (such as
analgesics, cough and allergy medications), as well as medical sundries (including surgical and medical
instruments, surgical dressings, and diagnostic products such as needles and thermometers). This category
includes sales of these products to individuals, but excludes purchases made by health care providers or
facilities.

Data Sources: Estimates of consumer retail purchases of these products are derived from Personal
Consumption Expenditures (PCE) data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).2

Methods: The estimate for other non-durable medical products reflects the two relevant PCE categories
since they align with the NHE definition of other non-durable medical products. It captures total expenditures
on non-prescription drugs and other medical products for the period 1960–2024.

Durable Medical Equipment
Definition: Durable Medical Equipment expenditures include medical products intended for repeated or
long-term use, generally with a useful life of three years or more. This category covers items such as contact
lenses, eyeglasses and other ophthalmic goods, surgical instruments and supplies, prosthetic and artificial
devices, orthopedic equipment, and hearing aids. In addition to purchases, rental payments for DME are also
included in this estimate.

Data Sources: Durable Medical Equipment estimates are based on several federal data sources, including
the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE), the Economic
Census (EC), the Input-Output (I-O) Accounts, and a supplementary table known as the PCE Bridge Table,
which links PCE categories to the I-O framework. 2

Methods: Durable Medical Equipment (DME) estimates are benchmarked to the Input-Output (I/O) accounts
(when available) and Economic Census (EC) data and then adjusted to align with the NHE definition. For non-
benchmark years, total DME expenditures are extrapolated and interpolated using the annual PCE Bridge
Tables. In years when that information is unavailable, DME expenditures are estimated using trends in the
PCE for therapeutic appliances and equipment.




                                                       12
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Payers and Programs for Medical Services and Goods
The payers and programs for personal health care (PHC) shown in Exhibit 4 are directly responsible for
purchasing or providing medical goods and services. These payers include out-of-pocket, health insurance,
and other third-party payers and programs.

Exhibit 4: Structure of the NHEA by Source of Funds

 National Health Expenditures (NHE)
 equals HCE plus Investment
    Health Consumption Expenditures (HCE)
    equals PHC plus Government Administration, Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures, Public Health
    Activities
       Personal Health Care
       (PHC)
           Out-of-Pocket
           Health Insurance
                Private Health Insurance
                Medicare
                Medicaid (Title XIX)
                Children's Health Insurance Program (Title XIX and Title XXI)
                Department of Defense
                Department of Veterans Affairs
           Other Third-Party Payers and Programs
                Worksite Health Care
                Other Private Revenues
                Indian Health Services
                Workers' Compensation
                General Assistance
                Maternal/Child Health
                Vocational Rehabilitation
                Other Federal Programs
                SAMHSA
                Other State and Local Programs
                School Health
        Government Administration
        Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures
        Public Health Activities
    Investment
       Non-Commercial Research
        Structures and Equipment

Source: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health Statistics Group.




                                                           13
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Out-of-Pocket
Definition: Out-of-pocket (OOP) spending for health care consists of direct spending by consumers for
health care goods and services including the amount paid out-of-pocket for services not covered by
insurance. It also includes copayments, coinsurance, or deductibles required by private health insurance
(PHI) and public programs such as Medicare and Medicaid (not paid by some other third party), as well as
payments covered by health savings accounts (HSAs).

Premium payments for private insurance plans (including Medicare Advantage private plans) are not
included in out-of-pocket spending since the payment by the enrollee is paid to a third-party insurer (PHI or
Medicare) that is classified in the NHEA as a separate source of funds. Similarly, coinsurance and deductible
amounts paid by supplementary Medicare policies on behalf of enrolled Medicare beneficiaries are also
excluded from the out-of-pocket source of funds category and are counted as private health insurance.

Data Sources: For hospitals, physicians and clinics, dental, other professionals, home health, and nursing
home services, the Service Annual Survey10 provides data on out-of-pocket payments along with all other
sources of funds. Other sources of data that are used to estimate out-of-pocket spending include Medicare
and Medicaid program data, the Health Care Cost and Utilization Report, 32 IQVIA,30 the Medical Expenditure
                                                                         31F




Panel Survey,41 the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, 33 the Consumer Expenditure Survey 34 as well as
                                                                  32F                           33F




trade association publications such as from the Visiting Nurses Association, 35 the American Hospital
                                                                               34F




Association,11 the American Medical Association, 36 and the American Dental Association. 37
                                                       35F                                36F




In previous years, data from surveys of the non-institutional population’s health care use and financing
patterns provided information used to determine the amount of out-of-pocket spending. For 1963 and 1970,
the Center for Health Administration Studies and the National Opinion Research Center, both at the
University of Chicago, surveyed individuals for the purpose of providing “reliable and valid statistics of
medical care use and expenditures”. 38 These studies were followed by the National Medical Care
                                     37F




Expenditure Survey (for 1977 and 1987), 39 the National Medical Care Utilization and Expenditure Survey (for
                                           38F




1980), 40 and the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household Component (MEPS-HC) (for 1996-2008). 41
      39F                                                                                                      40F




Method: Out-of-pocket expenditures are estimated using a residual methodology. First, for each NHE type
of service, overall expenditures are estimated (see methodology for each individual service piece). Second,
payments for public payers (which are estimated using payer-specific program data) are subtracted from
total expenditures, with the residual remaining for private payers. The private residual is allocated using
information from survey data such as the Service Annual Survey, as well as other sources that may be
available specific to each service industry. Using percent distributions that are developed to allocate the
private residual, the appropriate amount of expenditures are allocated to private health insurance, out-of-
pocket spending, and other private revenues.

Health Insurance
This aggregate category includes private health insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, the Children’s Health
Insurance Program, the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs. These plans provide
enrollees and beneficiaries insurance against medical losses and, in some instances, directly provide
medical care.

Private Health Insurance
Definition: Private health insurance expenditures in the NHEA include total outlays for private health
insurance coverage. This estimate includes Health Maintenance Organizations, Preferred Provider
Organizations, Point of Service Plans, Consumer Directed Plans, and indemnity plans, among others.

Data Sources: Private health insurance benefits by type of service are estimated using provider survey data
from the U.S. Census Bureau in conjunction with source of funding spending from several sources. These
sources include the American Medical Association,36 the American Hospital Association,11 A.M. Best, 42 the
                                                                                                         41F




Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 43 as well as household data from surveys such as the National
                                                 42F




                                                             14
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Medical Care Expenditure Survey39 and the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household Component
(MEPS-HC).41

Method: Private health insurance expenditures are estimated using a residual methodology. First, for each
NHE type of service, overall expenditures are estimated (see methodology for each individual service piece).
Second, payments for public payers (which are estimated using payer-specific program data) are subtracted
from total expenditures, with the residual remaining for private payers. The private residual is allocated using
information from survey data such as the Service Annual Survey, as well as other sources that may be
available specific to each service industry. Using percent distributions that are developed to allocate the
private residual, the appropriate amount of expenditures are allocated to private health insurance, out-of-
pocket spending, and other private revenues.

Medicare
Definition: Medicare is a health insurance program for people aged 65 or older, people under the age of 65
with certain disabilities, and people of all ages with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Medicare consists of
four main parts: Hospital Insurance (HI), or Part A; Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI), or Part B;
Medicare Advantage private plan coverage, or Part C; and Prescription Drug Coverage, or Part D.

Medicare is offered in one of two options, the first being original fee-for-service, which is a traditional health
care model where providers are reimbursed for each service they provide and beneficiaries pay a portion of
the costs. Fee-for-service covers Part A services, which includes inpatient hospital, skilled nursing facilities,
home health care, and hospice care; Part B services, which includes outpatient hospital, physician services,
home health care, durable medical equipment, laboratory tests performed in physician offices and
independent laboratories, and services provided by other medical professionals; and Part D which includes
retail prescription drugs.

Medicare is also offered through Medicare private plans (commonly referred to as “Medicare Advantage”)
where private insurance companies contract with the federal government to provide a standard package of
Medicare benefits (Parts A, B, and D), and sometimes extra benefits such as vision, hearing, and dental
coverage, to their enrollees. Medicare pays a pre-determined per enrollee monthly amount to the Medicare
Advantage private health plan to cover the costs of providing services to their members. Collectively,
Medicare Advantage private plan spending is referred to as Part C.

Data Sources: Estimates of Medicare spending for personal health care are based on information prepared
by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Office of the Actuary for the Medicare Trustees
Report, 44 bid pricing tool data submitted by Medicare contractors, and Medicare administrative and
       43F




statistical records.

Method: Medicare expenditures by type of service are separately estimated for traditional fee-for-service and
for Medicare Advantage private health plans. Fee-for service and private plan expenditures are then summed
for each type of service, and subsequently the services are summed to represent total incurred Medicare
benefit spending.

To estimate fee-for-service expenditures, incurred benefit spending data from the annual Medicare Trustees
Report is used. Because the NHEA reflect spending based in the U.S. only (50 states plus the District of
Columbia), an adjustment is first made to exclude spending for U.S. territories and outlying areas. Next,
Medicare statistical and program data are used to convert, or crosswalk, the published categories from the
Medicare Trustees Report to NHE service categories. For example, Part A Trustees Report data (which
includes inpatient hospital care, skilled nursing facilities, Part A home health care, and hospice services) are
crosswalked into the NHE categories for hospitals, nursing care facilities, and home health care. In the
NHEA, hospital-based skilled nursing care, hospital-based home health care, and hospital-based hospice
services are all included in the NHE hospital category. Additionally, Trustees Report data for Part B carrier
services (which includes Part B fee schedule services, physician-administered drugs, laboratory services,
and durable medical equipment) are crosswalked into the NHE categories for physician services, dental


                                                        15
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

services, other professional services, home health care, nursing home care, retail prescription drugs,
durable medical equipment, and other non-durable medical products. Trustees report data for Part B
intermediary services (which includes outpatient hospital, Part B home health care, and other intermediary
services) are mapped into hospital care, home health care, and clinical services.

To estimate Medicare Advantage private plan expenditures by type of service, total Part C Trustees Report
incurred spending is allocated using information submitted to CMS on plans’ bid pricing tools. Bid pricing
tools are used to inform CMS about the types of services that the plan intends to provide to their enrollees for
the upcoming contract year, and they also contain information about base period experience for the most
recent full year.

Medicaid
Definition: Medicaid provides health coverage to Americans, including eligible low-income adults, children,
pregnant women, elderly adults and people with disabilities. Medicaid is administered by states, according
to federal requirements. The program is funded jointly by states and the federal government.

Data Sources: Medicaid estimates are based primarily on financial information filed by state Medicaid
agencies on Form CMS-64. 45 These state level reports provide total program net expenditures by Medicaid
                           44F




program category including program administration and premiums. Prior to the availability of the Quarterly
Expense Report (Form CMS-64) in 1979, state statistical reports (Form CMS-2082) were used to develop
service distributions.

Method: Medicaid expenditures, as reported by state by program categories on Form CMS-64, are mapped
to NHEA service categories for each state. For example, total Medicaid hospital spending is the sum of
eleven types of program payments, including: inpatient hospital–regular, inpatient hospital–disproportionate
share hospital (DSH), inpatient hospital–supplemental, inpatient hospital–graduate medical education,
mental health facility services–regular, mental health facility–DSH, outpatient hospital services–regular,
outpatient hospital services–supplemental, emergency hospital services, health information technology
incentive payments, and critical access hospitals. All program categories are assigned to NHEA service
categories in this fashion. CMS-64 categories that pertain to home and community-based waivers are
included in the NHEA category for Other Health Residential and Personal Care Services.

A series of adjustments are then made to the CMS-64 data, including a) allocating expenditures to the
appropriate year to account for payments that occurred in prior periods, b) moving hospital-based nursing
home and home health expenditures to the hospital category, and c) deducting expenditures for Medicaid
buy-ins to Medicare to avoid double counting in the NHEA. For durable medical equipment (DME) Medicaid
spending, the estimate is developed from the Medicaid Analytic eXtract (MAX) 46 through 2014 and the TAF
                                                                               45F




Research Identifiable Files version of the Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System 47 for more
                                                                                                 46F




recent periods.

For capitated and other insurance premium payments included with CMS-64 data, the method is to first
remove administrative costs and an estimated portion of state-directed payments from Medicaid premium
payments. State-directed payments are then allocated to services using Office of the Actuary analysis of
state-directed payment preprints. 48 The remainder of premiums are then allocated to NHEA service
                                  47F




categories using TAF and 2017 Economic Census Health Care and Social Assistance: Revenue by Type of
Payer for the US and States: 2017. 49 In certain states, additional adjustments are made to account for
                                   48F




specific services or products that are carved out of the premium. These carve-outs typically occur for
prescription drugs and dental services.

Children’s Health Insurance Program (Title XIX and Title XXI)
Definition: The Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) is a joint federal/state program that provides
health insurance for children in families that do not have health insurance coverage and are not eligible for
Medicaid. CHIP was created in 1997 with the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (BBA97). The


                                                      16
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

BBA97 gave states the option to set up new independent health insurance programs for children (Title 21), to
expand existing state Medicaid programs to insure children who were eligible for health insurance coverage
under CHIP eligibility standards (Title 19), or to use a combination of CHIP programs and Medicaid
expansions. The Children's Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 (CHIPRA or Public Law
111-3) reauthorized CHIP through FY 2013. The Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) extended CHIP funding
through FY 2015, and the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) further extended
CHIP funding through FY 2017. The Healthy Kids Act funded CHIP for six years (FY2018 to FY2023) and the
Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 funded CHIP for four more years (FY2024 to FY2027).

Data Sources: State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) spending data is gathered from Form
CMS-21. Medicaid expansion-based CHIP programs (MCHIP) spending data is gathered from Form CMS-
64.45

Method: Quarterly SCHIP and MCHIP data by state are extracted from the relevant forms and aggregated into
calendar years. The state data are aggregated to obtain a U.S. total. Service distributions are derived from
program payment data and aligned with NHEA service categories using the same methodology as used for
the Medicaid estimates.

Department of Defense
Definition: The Department of Defense (DOD) provides health care through the Military Health System (MHS)
and its TRICARE program to members of the uniformed services, their families and their survivors, as well as
retired members and their families. The MHS consists of direct care system, where beneficiaries obtain care
at military treatment facilities (MTF), and a purchased care system, where beneficiaries obtain care from
private sector providers administered by TRICARE network contracts.

Data Sources: Health care expenditures data come directly from DOD. These are sourced from the DOD FY
Presidents Budget submissions, 50 unpublished data for active-duty spending by service, 51 and data for non-
                                 49F                                                    50F




active-duty spending by service. 52 Additionally, receipts to the Defense Health Program from the DOD
                                51F




Medicare Eligible Retiree Health Care fund are included, covering health care costs of Medicare-eligible
retirees, their families, and survivors.

Method: DOD budget and Medicare-Eligible Retiree Health Care Fund (MERHCF) data are combined to
calculate sums for direct care (provided in MTF) and purchased care. These expenditures are then allocated
to NHEA services based on the distribution of DOD spending by service. Administration spending is based on
actual program data. All DOD spending data is converted from a federal fiscal year to a calendar year and
adjusted to exclude spending outside the scope of the NHEA, such as expenditures for non-DOD
beneficiaries (e.g., Coast Guard, Public Health Service, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration).

Department of Veterans Affairs
Definition: The Department of Veterans Affairs provides health care and other services to Veterans and other
eligible beneficiaries through the Veterans Health Administration, which provides a broad range of primary
care, specialized care and related medical and social support services that are uniquely related to Veterans’
health or special needs.

Data Sources: The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) estimates of health expenditures are prepared using
unpublished detailed quarterly expenditure data supplied by the VA 53 supplemented with data from the
                                                                   52F




Appendix to the Budget of the U.S. Government, 54 Monthly Treasury Statements of Receipts and Outlays of
                                               53F




the U.S. Government, 55 and VA Annual Reports and Congressional Submissions. 56
                     54F                                                        55F




Method: Using fiscal quarterly data obtained directly from the VA, expenditures for each detailed VA category
are crosswalked to NHE service categories and then are converted to calendar year totals. Annual fiscal and
calendar year growth rates from Monthly Treasury Statements, the Budget Appendix, and other annual VA
reports are used to compare and validate the trends of the expenditure data obtained from the VA.


                                                     17
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Other Third-Party Payers and Programs

Worksite Health Care
Definition: Worksite health care includes health care goods and services that are directly provided by
employers to their employees. This includes services such as those provided at an on-site health unit, such
as the administration of flu shots and blood tests and onsite physician services.

Data Sources: The worksite health care estimate is based primarily on a 1967 estimate of the cost per
employee for those with access to worksite health care services, obtained from historical surveys of
employer-sponsored health plans. Other data sources used to estimate worksite health care expenditures
include the number of employed civilians and the Consumer Price Index (CPI)16 for physicians, both from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, as well as data from Mercer’s National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health
Plans17 and from the Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research and Educational Trust Survey of Employer-
Sponsored Health Benefits.18

Method: In 1967, cost data from surveys of employer-sponsored health plans was used to produce an
original estimate of costs per employee for those with access to worksite health care services. Costs per
employee in 1967 were extrapolated to earlier and later years using the CPI for physician services. To
estimate the number of employees with access to worksite health care, the number of employed civilians is
multiplied by an assumption for the percentage of employees with access to worksite health care. Costs per
employee are then multiplied by the estimate of the number of employees with access to worksite health
care to produce total worksite health care costs. The estimate is then adjusted to account for growth in the
use and intensity of services.

Other Private Revenues
Definition: Other private revenues include the medical portion of property and casualty insurance,
philanthropic support, and non-patient revenue. Philanthropic support may be direct from individuals or may
be obtained through philanthropic fund-raising organizations such as the United Way, or other foundations or
corporations. Philanthropic revenues may be spent directly for patient care or may be held in an endowment
fund to produce income to cover current expenses. For institutions such as hospitals, nursing homes and
home health agencies, other private funds also include non-patient income from the operation of gift shops,
cafeterias, parking lots, educational programs, and investment income.

Data Sources: Estimates of other private revenues, including philanthropy, are based on information from
the U.S. Census Bureau’ Services Annual Survey,10 trade associations, the American Hospital Association
Annual Survey,11 and person surveys such as the National Medical Care Expenditure Survey39 and the
National Medical Care Utilization and Expenditure Survey.40 The medical portion of property and casualty
insurance is also included in this estimate. First, estimates of property and casualty insurance benefits are
developed for automobile, homeowners, and multi-peril insurance using annual data for premiums earned
and direct losses incurred that are published by A.M. Best.42 The medical portion of these data are further
estimated using data from the Insurance Information Institute 57 and from the National Highway Traffic Safety
                                                              56F




Administration. 58
               57F




Method: Other Private Revenues are estimated using a residual methodology. First, for each NHE type of
service, overall expenditures are estimated (see methodology for each individual service piece). Second,
payments for public payers (which are estimated using payer-specific program data) are subtracted from
total expenditures, with the residual remaining for private payers. The private residual is allocated using
information from survey data such as the Service Annual Survey, as well as other sources that may be
available specific to each service industry. Using percent distributions that are developed to allocate the
private residual, the appropriate amount of expenditures are allocated to private health insurance, out-of-
pocket spending, and other private revenues. An estimate of the medical component of property and
casualty insurance by service is also estimated and is included with other private revenues.



                                                      18
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Indian Health Services
Definition: The Indian Health Service (IHS), an agency within the Department of Health and Human Services,
is responsible for providing federal health services to American Indians and Alaska Natives. The provision of
health services to members of federally recognized tribes grew out of the special government-to-government
relationship between the federal government and Indian tribes. The IHS is the principal federal health care
provider and health advocate for Native American people.

Data Sources: The NHEA estimate of IHS spending is based on data from the Appendix to the Budget of the
U.S. Government.54 The IHS Budget justification document is also used to estimate the goods and services
distributions of IHS spending.

Method: The IHS funding obligations from the President’s Budget are cross walked to NHEA categories and
adjusted to estimate funding outlays. Data from IHS congressional justification documents and historical
data are used to distribute the outlays into NHEA service categories, while administration spending is based
on historical data.

Workers’ Compensation
Definition: Workers’ compensation includes medical benefit expenditures that are paid by workers’
compensation insurance programs. These programs are prescribed by state or federal laws for which costs
are paid directly by employers or workers. This includes: all state workers’ compensation programs; the
Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), which provides benefits to federal workers; the portion of the
Longshore and Harbor Workers Act (LHWCA) paid by employers, which provides protection to longshore,
harbor, and other maritime workers; the portion of the Black Lung Benefits Act financed by employers, which
provides compensation to coal miners with black lung disease; and the Energy Employees Occupational
Illness Compensation Program.

The U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, administers compensation
programs that provide benefits to federal workers or their dependents that are injured at work or acquire an
occupational disease. These benefits include wage replacement, medical treatment, and vocational
rehabilitation, with death benefits also available to survivors.

Non-federal workers’ compensation programs are financed almost exclusively by employers. Premiums are
based on industry classification and the occupational classification of their workers. Most large employers
are also experience-rated. All non-federal workers’ compensation programs are designed and administered
by the state. Generally, state laws require that all non-federal employers purchase insurance, either from
commercial (private) insurers or from publicly operated state funds or prove that they have the financial
ability to carry their own risk (self).

Data Sources: Estimates for federal workers’ compensation programs are based on the Appendix to the
Budget of the U.S. Government54 and medical benefits and administrative costs from the U.S. Department of
Labor.

For non-federal workers’ compensation, expenditures are estimated using data from the Census Bureau’s
Service Annual Survey (SAS)10 and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Market
Share Reports for Property/Casualty Groups and Companies. 59 For 1994-2022, national data on workers’
                                                             58F




compensation benefits and costs were based on data from the National Academy of Social Insurance
(NASI). 60 For 1993 and years prior, data was obtained from the Social Security Administration (SSA).
       59F




Method: For historical estimates through 2022, workers’ compensation estimates are based on employer
costs and benefits paid using data from NASI publications. To extrapolate medical benefits to the current
year, a historical workers’ compensation medical benefits trend was developed from SAS data and applied to
the 2022 NASI-based medical benefit estimate. To estimate workers’ compensation non-medical
expenditures through 2022, the difference between employer costs and benefits paid based on NASI data



                                                     19
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

was calculated. For 2023 forward, the NASI-based non-medical expenditure level is extrapolated using data
from NAIC on direct premiums and losses.

General Assistance
Definition: General assistance expenditures in the NHEA include two types of programs: General assistance
programs that are often modeled after Medicaid, and State Pharmaceutical Assistance Programs (SPAP) that
provide low-income and medically needy senior citizens and individuals with disabilities financial assistance
for prescription drugs.

General assistance refers to direct payments for health care goods or services to or on behalf of needy
people who do not qualify for federally financed assistance programs. These payments are provided by state
and local governments and are not financed in whole or part by federal funds. General assistance may be
administered by the state welfare agency, a local agency, or a local agency under state supervision.
Eligibility requirements and payment levels of general assistance programs vary greatly from state to state
and often within a state. SPAP data are collected separately from other general assistance data.

Data Sources: Estimates of general assistance and SPAP expenditures are based on data from the annual
State Expenditures Report by the National Association of State Budget Officers (NASBO), 61 along with data
                                                                                          60F




collected directly from the pertinent state or county agencies, as no national clearinghouse for these data
exists.

Method: Historical estimates, based on state-level data of general assistance programs, are extrapolated
using the growth in NASBO Other Cash Assistance for most states, while state budget data for general
assistance programs are used to estimate the remainder. Estimates of SPAPs are based on data collected
directly from each participating state.

Maternal and Child Health
Definition: The Maternal and Child Health program is a joint federal and state program that promotes and
improves the health and well-being of mothers, children, and families. The program is administered by the
Department of Health and Human Services under the Health Resources and Services Administration through
the Maternal and Child Health Bureau. The program seeks to improve access to quality care (especially for
individuals with low income), reduce infant mortality, provide comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care for
women, increase health assessments and diagnostic and treatment services, provide access to preventive
and rehabilitative services for children in need of specialized medical services, and create family-centered,
community-based systems of coordinated care for children with special health care needs.

Maternal and child health funds are distributed to grantees from 59 states and other jurisdictions (59 total
grantees). States and other jurisdictions must match every four dollars of federal money that they receive
with at least three dollars of state and/or local money (i.e., non-federal dollars).

Data Sources: Data for federal and state Maternal and Child Health spending is obtained directly from the
Maternal and Child Health Bureau. The federal portion is based mainly on the State Maternal and Child
Health block grant program, Special Projects of Regional and National Significance, and Community
Integrated Service Systems. The historical state and local spending estimate is based on Public Health
Foundation data 62 and data from 1998 forward is available on the Maternal and Child Health Bureau
                61F




website. 63
        62F




Method: Aggregate personal health care and administrative spending for Maternal and Child Health (MCH) is
first estimated and then converted from fiscal years to calendar years, covering both federal and state & local
MCH expenditures. These totals are subsequently distributed into various service categories using the NHEA
service distributions.




                                                      20
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Vocational Rehabilitation
Definition: The vocational rehabilitation program is financed through federal, state, and local government
funds to support the rehabilitation of individuals with physical and mental impairments. Within the NHEA,
only personal health care goods and services funded by this program are included.

Data Sources: Data for the vocational rehabilitation program are obtained from the Appendix to the Budget
of the U.S. Government54 and from the U.S. Department of Education’s vocational rehabilitation state grant
program, 64 which provides information on federal, state, and local spending. Historical service-level
         63F




expenditures were obtained from cost report data from the Rehabilitation Services Administration, a sub-
agency within the Department of Education. 6564F




Method: Total expenditures for vocational rehabilitation are estimated based on state grant data, which
include current and projected federal, state, and local spending. Historically, total spending was then
allocated to the NHEA categories for Hospitals, Physicians and Clinical Services, and Durable Medical
Equipment using cost report data from the Rehabilitation Services Administration. For 2021 and forward,
total vocational rehabilitation expenditures are allocated using service distributions derived from total
national health expenditures.

Other Federal Programs
Definition and Data Sources: This category includes federal health care funds and grants budgeted to
various federal agencies that are not reflected in other categories in the NHEA, Office of Economic
Opportunity expenditures, Non-XIX federal expenditures, Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan
expenditures, and expenditures for the Provider Relief Fund and Paycheck Protection Program Loans.

Data on health care funds and grants are obtained from the Budget Appendix of the U.S. Government for the
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) and the Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS). Estimates of other federal program expenditures are based, in part, on data reported by the budget
offices of federal agencies, such as for the Assistant Secretary for Health, Howard University Hospital,
Department of Education, Department of Justice, AmeriCorps, and the Department of Defense (civilian
programs). Several differences exist between spending definitions in the federal budget and those used in
the conceptual framework of the NHEA. Expenditures for the education and training of health professionals
(including direct support of health professional schools and student assistance through loans and
scholarships) are not included in the NHEA. Furthermore, payments made by government agencies for
employee health insurance are included with private health insurance expenditures rather than government
expenditures.

Expenditures for two programs that no longer exist are included in earlier years. Expenditures for the Office
of Economic Opportunity were included in the NHEA category for Other Federal Programs during 1965 to
1973, and non-XIX federal expenditures were included during 1960 to 1971.

Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plans (2010–2014) were created under the Affordable Care Act of 2010
(ACA) to provide a health coverage option for U.S. citizens and legal residents that have been without health
coverage for at least six months, have a pre-existing condition, or have been denied health coverage because
of their health condition.

The Provider Relief Fund (PRF) and Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Loan programs were created in 2020
as a response to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The Provider Relief Fund was designed
to offset health care providers’ loss in revenue from the pandemic, as well as to give them resources to
improve their ability to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. The PPP Loan program was designed to help small
businesses maintain employees and cover other eligible expenses by providing forgivable loans. While not
directly targeted at healthcare providers, healthcare providers that met eligibility requirements took part in
the program. Expenditures for the Provider Relief Fund were estimated using data from the Health Resources
and Services Administration, and expenditures for the PPP Loan program were estimated using data from the
Small Business Administration.


                                                      21
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Method: Funding amounts from federal budget data are either directly assigned or estimated for the
following service categories: Hospitals, Clinics, and Other Health Residential and Personal Care. Estimates
for the Provider Relief Fund and PPP Loans are allocated to the appropriate NHEA service categories and are
then summed to incorporate into the overall estimate for Other Federal Programs. 66 65F




Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Definition: The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) provides grants or
outlays for program areas such as: Substance Abuse Treatment Capacity, Mental Health System
Transformation, Strategic Prevention Framework, Co-Occurring Disorders, Seclusion & Restraint (elimination
of), Older Adults, and HIV/AIDS & Hepatitis. These funds are used in part to purchase or provide personal
health care services.

Data Sources: The data sources for this estimate include the SAMHSA budget, monthly treasury statements
from the Department of the Treasury,55 and the Appendix to the Budget of the U.S. Government.54

Method: SAMHSA expenditures are estimated in two pieces: program administration and services provided.
Both components are estimated based on data from the SAMHSA budget. Expenditures for program
administration are scaled to remove research expenditures using a ratio of substance abuse plus mental
health outlays divided by total outlays (substance abuse, mental health, and all other outlays) minus
program management outlays from the budget. Spending is then allocated to the service categories using
budget block grant and SAMHSA provider data.

Other State and Local Programs
Definition: Other state and local programs include temporary disability insurance, state and local subsidies
to providers, and non-XIX state and local health care expenditures.

In general, all spending by state and local governments that are not reimbursed by the federal government
(through benefit payments or grants-in-aid) nor by patients or their agents are treated as state and local
expenditures. As with federal expenditures, payments for employee health insurance by state and local
governments are included in private health insurance.

Temporary disability insurance includes medical care benefits provided to workers as a result of temporary
non-occupational disability or short-term sickness. This benefit is currently offered solely in the state of New
York.

State and local subsidies are payments by the state and local government to hospitals, home health
agencies, and other facilities owned by the state.

Data Sources: Data covering state and local programs come from a variety of sources. State agencies self-
report information on state-specific programs. The U.S. Census Bureau collects data on state and local
health and hospital expenditures through its quinquennial census and intercensal sample surveys.

Estimates for temporary disability insurance use data from the New York State Workers Comp Board and the
Social Security Bulletin Annual Statistical Supplement.

Method: For temporary disability insurance, levels are from the New York State Workers Comp Board and the
Social Security Bulletin Annual Statistical Supplement. For 2008 forward, estimates are imputed using data
from the New York state labor force. Estimates are allocated to services using the latest NHE service
distributions.

School Health
Definition: School health includes all personal health care expenditures for students in primary and
secondary public and private schools. This may include school nursing services, hearing and vision tests, as
well as more comprehensive clinical services.


                                                       22
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Data Sources: The data sources used for this estimate include information from the Department of
Education 67 and the National Public Education Financial Survey conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau.
           66F




Method: School health expenditure estimates for public schools are updated from data on public school
expenditures for “other student and school activities”. Spending occurring by private schools are built into
the total by using a per student level from the public school estimate and multiplying this by total enrollment
in both private and public schools.

Categories Added at the Health Consumption Expenditures Aggregation Level

Government Administration and Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures
This category includes the administrative costs of health care programs such as Medicare and Medicaid, as
well as the non-medical insurance expenditures associated with various types of insurers and insurance
plans. Non-medical insurance expenditures are defined as the difference between private health insurance
expenditures and benefits incurred, and include administrative costs, additions to reserves, rate credits and
dividends, premium taxes and fees, and net underwriting gains or losses. 6867F




Private Health Insurance

The estimate of non-medical insurance expenditures by private health insurance plans is developed using
data from A.M. Best42 to estimate total premiums and benefits paid for insurance plans, including for
indemnity, managed care, and property and casualty insurers. Additionally, estimates of self-insured plans
and prepaid plans are developed using from data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Insurance
Component (MEPS-IC) 69 and a variety of sources including the Survey of Health Insurance Plans conducted
                       68F




by the Health Care Financing Administration for earlier years.15 Taken together, these data provide an
estimate of the relationship between PHI expenditures and benefits, called the “insurer non-medical ratio” in
the NHEA.

For years prior to 1996, the insurer non-medical ratio was developed using a number of health insurance
industry sources. This method measured PHI expenditures and incurred benefits directly from the principal
payment source. Data for the Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans were used to estimate the non-medical
insurance expenditures of plans marketed by its members. 70 Annual data on PHI spending and benefits
                                                            69F




published by the National Underwriter Company 71 were used to develop estimates for commercial carriers
                                                 70F




through 1995. Estimates for prepaid plans in later years were developed using data from the Group Health
Association of America which later became American Association of Health Plans. 72   71F




To produce a non-medical insurance expenditure level and total PHI expenditure level, the insurer non-
medical ratio is applied to an estimate of PHI benefits by type of service for all years back to 1960. The PHI
benefit level is estimated using provider survey data in conjunction with source of funding spending from
several sources. These sources include the U.S. Census Bureau, the American Medical Association,36 and
the American Hospital Association11 as well as household data from surveys such as the National Medical
Care Expenditure Survey,39 and later the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household Component (MEPS-
HC).41

Medicare

Medicare program spending includes administrative costs borne by the federal government to pay for
salaries and expenses related to the federal management of Medicare Hospital Insurance (or Part A) and
Supplementary Medical Insurance (or Parts B and D). Also included in total Medicare expenditures are non-
medical insurance expenditures for private plans administering the Part C (Medicare Advantage) and Part D
(prescription drugs) programs.

Medicare government administrative expenses are obtained from Department of the Treasury reports
submitted to the Office of the Actuary, as reported annually in the Medicare Trustees Report.44 For the non-
medical insurance expenditures component of Medicare Advantage private plans, data is obtained from bid

                                                       23
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

pricing tool information that plans submit to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Estimates of Part
D administration are obtained from Medicare Trustees Report data and represent general Part D federal
government administration and non-medical insurance expenditures for private plans.

When estimating the non-medical insurance expenditures for Part D, separate calculations are done for
stand-alone prescription drug plans and for Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans.

Estimates of the non-medical insurance expenditures for Part C and Part D private plans are added to the
estimates of general administrative costs of the federal government to equal total administrative and non-
medical expenditures for Medicare.

Medicaid
For Medicaid, government administrative costs include federal and state and local salaries and expenses of
the program, as well as non-medical insurance expenditures that are incurred by the private plans that insure
Medicaid enrollees. Medicaid administrative costs are estimated using Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services' (CMS) program data. Non-medical insurance expenditures are prepared using total premiums paid
(from the CMS-64 forms)45 and unique insurer non-medical ratios developed from AM Best’s NAIC financial
statements.42 These estimates of private insurers’ non-medical insurance expenditures are deducted from
Medicaid premium payments and added to the Medicaid administrative cost estimates to derive Medicaid
expenditures at the health consumption expenditure level. Medicaid premium payments that are reduced by
non-medical insurance expenditures are allocated to the National Health Expenditure Accounts’ service
categories using TAF and 2017 Economic Census Health Care and Social Assistance: Revenue by Type of
Payer for the US and States: 2017.49

Children’s Health Insurance Program
Administration and non-medical insurance expenditures of private insurance for the Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP) covers all of the federal and state and local salaries and expenses of the program
as well as non-medical insurance expenditures by the private plans that insure CHIP enrollees.42 These
expenditures, when added to the personal health care expenditures for CHIP, equal the health consumption
expenditures level for this program.

Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs
Administration estimates of the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs cover federal
salaries and expenses related to these health programs, including the administrative costs of providing care
directly to beneficiaries in Department of Defense and/or Department of Veterans Affairs facilities. These
expenditures, when added to personal health care expenditures, equal the health consumption expenditures
level for these programs and are estimated using program data as well as information from the Appendix to
the Budget of the U.S. Government.54

Other Third-Party Payers and Programs
Other third-party payers and programs that have administrative costs and/or the non-medical insurance
expenditures of private health insurance include Indian Health Service, workers’ compensation, Maternal
and Child Health, vocational rehabilitation, other federal programs, and the Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration. The estimates of non-medical insurance expenditures or direct
administrative costs are estimated using a variety of sources including administrative or budget data as well
as trade groups and other miscellaneous sources.




                                                     24
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Government Public Health Activities
Federal Public Health Activity

Definition: Government public health activity is defined as organizing and delivering population-wide health
services such as epidemiological surveillance, inoculations, immunization/vaccination services, disease
prevention programs, the operation of public health laboratories, and other such functions. These services
may be funded by the federal government and/or state and local governments.

At the federal level, the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) account for the great majority of federal public health spending. Specific public health-related
emergencies, such as the 9/11/2001 attack and the COVID-19 pandemic have led to additional funding
through other federal funding sources as applicable, such as the Public Health and Social Services
Emergency Fund, a portion of the HHS Departmental Management Budget, and certain functions within the
Department of Homeland Security.

Government public health activities do not include government spending for public works, environmental
functions (air and water pollution abatement, sanitation and sewage treatment, water supplies, etc.), or
emergency planning.

Data Sources: Federal government: spending outlays are taken from annual budget documents prepared by
the various agencies and summarized in the budget of the U.S.54 Congressional budget justifications and
treasury reports were also used to help estimate the amount and timing of public health spending for the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Methods: Budget data are first accumulated from the Programs and Financing sections of the Budget
Appendix as obligations for financing identified public health program conducted by the federal government.
Wherever the entire budget is devoted to public health, the actual and projected outlays for these programs
are added. Otherwise, other means for converting obligations to outlays are utilized. In many cases, these
conversions were developed in earlier periods when the budget more explicitly labeled both obligations and
outlays by program. Those ratios are still carried forward under the current system where only obligations
are identified by program. In some cases, a number of public health programs are folded into an overall
departmental budget.

State and Local Public Health Activity

Definition: State and local government public health activity expenditures are primarily for the operation of
state and local health departments. Federal payments to state and local governments through other
programs, such as Maternal and Child Health, are deducted to avoid double counting.

Data Sources: State and local governments’ spending is estimated using data from the quinquennial (5-year)
Census of Governments and from the Census Bureau’s annual survey of state and local government
finances; the latter surveys all state governments and a sample of local government units drawn from the 5-
year Census. Estimates for the most recent year are extrapolated using the average growth rate of the prior 3
years. These state fiscal year estimates are then converted to calendar year estimates.

Methods: State and local public health activity is estimated using Census data on healthcare outlays by
state and local governments less the associated outlays for capital expenditures, federal funding of state and
local public health programs, maternal and child health grants, and the portion of state and local
government research that is funded by the federal government and non-commercial organizations, all of
which are not included in this estimate. For years beyond the latest available annual survey of state and
local governments, the estimate is extrapolated using the prior year’s growth.




                                                      25
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Categories Added at the National Health Expenditures Aggregation Level

Investment

Non-Commercial Research
Definition: Non-commercial research encompasses healthcare research conducted by non-profit entities.
This includes research funded by federal and state governments, academic institutions, and nonprofit
organizations such as foundations, professional societies, and individuals. It excludes research funded by
for-profit firms.

Data Sources: There are three primary sources used to derive the non-commercial research estimate.
Federal government funding is based on National Institutes of Health (NIH) budget outlays54, 73 and National
                                                                                               72F




Science Foundation (NSF) research obligations. 74 State government funding is derived from the Higher
                                                 73F




Education Research and Development (HERD) Survey conducted by the NSF. 75 Private funding is based on
                                                                               74F




the tax audit data from ProPublica’s Nonprofit Explorer database. 76
                                                                   75F




Methods: Noncommercial Research Funding includes federal, state and local, and private sources. Federal
funding is derived primarily from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) budget, which reports annual outlays
with a two-year projection. After subtracting capital-related expenditures, the remaining budget is assigned
to research. Research obligations from other federal agencies to NIH, as published by the National Science
Foundation (NSF), are then carried forward to all subsequent NIH budget years.

State and local funding is based on published academic data from the NSF’s Higher Education Research and
Development (HERD) Survey, which provides research and development expenditures at the total research
level, while the non-academic portion of the estimate is extrapolated from 1997 forward using academic
trends.

Private research estimates, which were incorporated into the NHEA in 1992, were initially derived from the
same NSF sources used for state and local funding. From 2009 through 2015, IRS Form 990 data from the
Urban Institute’s National Center for Charitable Statistics 77 were incorporated to refine the private funding
                                                            76F




estimate, and for years after 2015, audited financial statements of nonprofit organizations classified as
medical research were used to construct annual trends of receipts and extrapolate forward.

Structures and Equipment

Structures
Definition: The structures component of the NHEA is defined as the value of new construction put in place
by non-retail medical establishments. The structures category includes new buildings; additions, alterations,
and major replacements; mechanical and electric installations; and site preparation. It also includes the
underlying costs of materials and labor, contractor profit, architectural and engineering work, those
overhead and administrative costs chargeable to the project’s owner, and interest and taxes paid during
construction. Maintenance and repairs are excluded.

Data Sources: Private structures estimates for 2023 and 2024 are derived from Medicare cost report data 78       77F




and U.S. Census Bureau Value of Construction Put in Place Survey data.80 For 1993-2022, the primary data
source for the private structures estimates is the Annual Capital Expenditures Survey (ACES). 79 The private
                                                                                                     78F




structures’ estimates for preceding years are based on data published by the U.S. Census Bureau 80 (1964-  79F




1992) and the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (1960-1964).

For public structures, the primary data source is BEA, Table 5.9.5. Gross Government Fixed Investment by
Type.2

Methods: For 2023 and 2024, estimated historical relationships between ACES data and Medicare cost
report data for hospitals and U.S. Census Bureau Value of Construction Put in Place Survey are applied to


                                                       26
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

2023 and 2024 trends obtained from these data sources to derive estimates of private structures for the
NHEA. To estimate private structures for 1993-2022, total expenditures for new structures for NAICS 62
obtained from the ACES data are adjusted to reflect only expenditures within the scope of the NHEA.
Specifically, the following expenditures for new structures are subtracted from the total: (1) NAICS 624
(except 6244) (Social Assistance (except Child Day Care Services), (2) NAICS 6244 (Child Day Care Services),
and (3) a portion of NAICS 623 estimated to reflect NAICS 623312 (Assisted Living Facilities for the Elderly)
and NAICS 623990 (Other Residential Care Facilities). The private structures’ estimates for preceding years
(1960-1992) are prepared by extrapolating the 1993 values back by a time series developed using data
published by the U.S. Census Bureau (1964-1992) and the BEA (1960-1964).

For public structures, the estimates for 1960-2024 are equal to the gross government investment in health
care structures (Federal and State & Local) from BEA, Table 5.9.5. Gross Government Fixed Investment by
Type.

Equipment
Definition: The equipment component of the NHEA is comprised of the value of new capital equipment
(including software) purchased or put in place by non-retail medical establishments during the year. This
definition is not limited to specific medical equipment or devices.

Data Sources: For 1993-2022, the primary data sources for the private equipment estimates are the ACES.79
The private equipment estimates for preceding years are based on data published by the U.S. Census
Bureau, Manufacturers’ Shipments, Inventories, & Orders (M3) survey. 81
                                                                      80F




For public equipment, the primary data source for 1960-2023 is data underlying BEA, Table 3.17, Selected
Government Current and Capital Expenditures by Function.2 Public equipment estimates for 2024 are
derived based on data obtained from BEA, Table 3.9.5. Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross
Investment.2

Methods: For 2023 and 2024, estimated historical relationships between ACES data and Census Bureau
Manufacturers’ Shipments, Inventories, and Orders (M3) survey are applied to 2023 and 2024 trends
obtained from the M3 survey to derive estimates of growth in private equipment for the NHEA. To estimate
private equipment for 1998-2022, total expenditures for new equipment for NAICS 62 obtained from the
ACES data are adjusted to reflect only expenditures within the scope of the NHEA. Specifically, the following
expenditures for new equipment are subtracted from the total: (1) NAICS 624 (except 6244) (Social
Assistance (except Child Day Care Services), (2) NAICS 6244 (Child Day Care Services), and (3) a portion of
NAICS 623 estimated to reflect NAICS 623312 (Assisted Living Facilities for the Elderly) and NAICS 623990
(Other Residential Care Facilities).

For public equipment, the estimates for 1960-2023 are equal to government gross investment data (Federal
and State & Local) for Equipment and Software for the health function from data provided by BEA. Public
equipment estimates for 2024 are derived using trends for gross investment in Equipment and Software
(Nondefense Federal and State & Local) obtained from BEA.




                                                     27
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


NHEA by Type of Sponsor

Introduction
The structure of NHEA provides estimates of both the sources of payment and the sponsors of health care.
The sources of payment include the payers and programs that directly pay for health care and are usually
third-party insurers.

Health spending by sponsor, or source of financing, provides estimates of spending by the businesses,
households, other private funds and governments that are responsible for financing, or sponsoring, health
care payments. The difference between payers and sponsors can be illustrated using private health
insurance as an example. Although private health insurers pay claims on behalf of individuals covered by
health insurance policies, premiums are often financed, or sponsored, by a combination of employers
(private businesses, federal government, and state/local governments), households (as employees or
purchased directly by individuals in the form of individually purchased policies), and government (such as
the Medicare retiree drug subsidy payments to private and state and local employers and the Marketplace
tax credits and subsidies).

Exhibit 5 provides a crosswalk of national health expenditures by payers and by sponsors.

Exhibit 5. Crosswalk of National Health Expenditure Payers to Business, Household, and Government
Sponsors

                        Sponsor    Business, Household, and Other Private                Government

                                   Private
    Payers                        Business       Household       Other Private    Federal   State and Local

       Out-of-pocket                                  X

       Private Health Insurance       X               X                              X             X

       Other Private Sponsors1                                         X

       Medicare                       X               X                              X             X

       Medicaid                                                                      X             X

       Other Payers 2                 X                                              X             X

1
 Includes Philanthropy, Private Research, Private Structures and Equipment, and Other Non-Patient revenues.
2
 Includes Department of Defense, Department of Veterans Affairs, Children’s Health Insurance Program, Worksite
Health Care, Indian Health Service, workers’ compensation, general assistance, Maternal and Child Health, vocational
rehabilitation, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, school health, public health activities,
federal and state and local research, and structures and equipment and other federal and state and local programs.

NHEA Expenditure Crosswalk to the Sponsor

Out-of-Pocket
Out-of-pocket expenditures are defined as direct spending by households for all health care goods and
services. This includes the amount paid out-of-pocket for services not covered by insurance; the amount of
copayment, coinsurance, and deductibles required by private health insurance and by public programs such
as Medicare and Medicaid (and not paid by some other third party); and payments from health and flexible
savings accounts. Cost-sharing subsidies for eligible individuals in the Marketplace are excluded from out-
of-pocket spending.



                                                          28
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Private Health Insurance
Private health insurance expenditures in the sponsor analysis are disaggregated into employer-sponsored
insurance and directly purchased insurance. These expenditures are then further allocated into the sponsors
that finance these expenditures, which include households, private businesses and governments.

Employer-sponsored insurance: Employer and Employee share
Employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) includes premiums paid by employers and/or employees for health
insurance plans offered by the employer, whether or not the employer actually contributes to the health plan.
Union health insurance plans are also considered to be employer-sponsored plans. The primary data source
for estimating ESI is the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Insurance Component (MEPS-IC).69 The MEPS-IC
contains estimates of employer- and employee-sponsored premiums for active employees, continuation of
health coverage (COBRA), 82 and retirees of non-federal sponsors (private businesses and state and local
                          81F




governments). The federal estimates of ESI premiums paid by federal employers, employees and retirees are
provided by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. 83    82F




Employer share
The employer share of premiums paid by private businesses and by state and local governments is based on
MEPS-IC data, while the employer share of premiums paid for by the federal government is based on data
provided by OPM.83 Because MEPS-IC data for state and local governments are lagged by one year,
estimates for the current year are based on Employer Cost for Employee Compensation (ECEC) data from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) National Compensation Survey. 84 For years prior to 2003 and for 2007,
                                                                    83F




the employer share of premiums are based on annual growth rates from ECEC data.
Employee share
Employer-sponsored private health insurance (PHI) premiums paid by active employees, retirees, and former
employees who are covered by COBRA are captured in the sponsor estimates as household spending. The
estimates of employee contributions for those with ESI through a private business or state and local
government are produced using MEPS-IC data; employee contributions for ESI through the federal
government are based on data from OPM. State and local government employee estimates for the most
current year are based on ECEC data, as MEPS-IC data is lagged by one year. For years prior to 2003 and for
2007, PHI premiums paid by retirees are based on the annual growth rate from the BLS’ Consumer
Expenditure Survey34 and the ECEC data. For 2007, premiums paid by private and state and local employees
are estimated using MEPS-IC data projected using the 2009 Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research and
Educational Trust Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits18 combined with the historical relationship
between the employee/retiree paid and the employer-paid share of ESI.

Direct purchase insurance
Direct purchase insurance includes premiums paid by individuals for policies that are not available through
an employer or a union-based plan. This includes Medigap policies, Marketplace plans, and other directly
purchased health insurance. The main data sources used in estimating direct purchase insurance premiums
include the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Consumer Expenditure Survey,34 the National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), 85 and CMS data.43, 86 From a sponsor perspective, all direct purchase
                                  84F                85F




insurance is considered household spending with the exceptions of a) the continuation of health coverage
(COBRA) subsidies 87 paid by the federal government which are based on data from the Internal Revenue
                   86F




Service (IRS), b) health insurance premium tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies from Marketplace plans,
and c) federal and state & local payments for the Basic Health Program.

Medicare
The Medicare program is financed by several different mechanisms. The Hospital Insurance (HI) Trust Fund
is primarily financed through Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes on covered payroll, plus
interest income, taxation of benefits, voluntary premiums and other revenues. The Supplementary Medical


                                                     29
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

Insurance (SMI) Trust Fund is financed through general revenues, premiums (Part B, Part D, and Medicare
premium buy-in programs by Medicaid), state phase-down payments, and interest income.
In the sponsor analysis, an increase in the assets of the Medicare HI Trust Fund allows for immediate
reductions in current federal general funding obligations for Medicare. These surpluses are recorded as
special interest-bearing treasury obligations and are combined with all other general revenues. The surplus
is reported as an offset to the difference between program outlays and the dedicated financing sources of
Medicare since, in essence, the surplus decreases the amount of general revenues necessary to pay for
health care.

Medicare spending is disaggregated to reflect these different financing sources in the sponsor analysis. The
HI payroll taxes paid by employers (private, federal, and state and local employers), along with one-half of
the self-employed payroll taxes, are assigned to businesses and federal and state/local governments (using
unpublished data from the Social Security Administration). The employees’ share of HI payroll taxes,
together with the other half of the self-employed payroll taxes, HI taxation of benefits, and SMI premiums, are
considered household spending.

Estimates for the Medicare premium buy-in program (payments made by state Medicaid programs for
Medicare Part A and Part B premiums for eligible individuals) and receipts from states for phased-down
Medicaid contributions for Part D are allocated to state and local governments. Additionally, the federal
Medicaid program pays for Medicare premiums as part of the buy-in program. The remaining Medicare
expenditures are roughly equal to trust fund interest income and federal general revenue contributions to
Medicare and are included in the federal government category.

Medicaid
Estimates of Medicaid spending are reflected in both federal and state spending from a sponsor perspective.

Other Health Insurance and Third-Party Payers and Programs
In the sponsor estimates, federal programs and payments including Department of Defense, Department of
Veterans Affairs, Indian Health Service, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, other
federal programs, federal public health activities, the federal share of Maternal and Child Health (MCH),
vocational rehabilitation, Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), workers’ compensation, and federal
investment in research, and structures and equipment are included as federal spending.

General assistance, school health, state public health activities, other state and local programs, the state
shares of MCH and CHIP, vocational rehabilitation, and state and local investment in research, and
structures and equipment are included as state and local spending in the sponsor estimates.

Worksite health care, state and local workers’ compensation, and temporary disability insurance are
classified into the private business sponsor category. 88 Private business investment in research, structures,
                                                      87F




and equipment are classified in other private sponsors.

Business, Household, Other Private Revenues, and Government
The crosswalk between the NHEA payers and programs and the underlying sponsors provides the
information needed to identify spending by businesses, households, other private revenues, and
governments. Below are the definitions for each of these sponsor categories.

Private Business
Private business health spending represents health care expenditures by employers on behalf of their
employees. These primarily include employer’s contributions for employer-sponsored insurance premiums
and Medicare Hospital Insurance (HI) trust fund payroll taxes (including half of total self-employed payroll


                                                      30
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

taxes). A portion of Medicare payroll taxes is included in the private business sector because they represent
dedicated taxes that are earmarked for health care spending. In addition, private business health spending
includes payments for state workers’ compensation, temporary disability insurance, and worksite health
care. Excluded from private business spending are Medicare retiree drug subsidy payments to private
employer plans beginning in 2010, small business tax credits beginning in 2010, and payments for the Early
Retirement Reinsurance Program for the period 2010-2011.

Households
Household health spending represents expenditures by individuals to provide or purchase health care for
themselves or family members. Household spending primarily includes the employee’s share of employer-
sponsored insurance premiums, premiums for directly purchased insurance, and Medicare Hospital
Insurance (HI) trust fund payroll taxes (including half of the total self-employed payroll taxes, and taxes paid
on Social Security benefits). The household portion of payroll taxes is included with the household sector
because they are dedicated taxes earmarked for health care spending. Premiums paid to the Medicare HI
and Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) Trust Funds, the Pre-existing Conditions Insurance Plans, and
the Basic Health Program are also included with households. Additionally, the medical portion of property
and casualty insurance (automobile, homeowners, multi-peril, or other liability insurance) is included with
households.

Out-of-pocket spending for copayments, deductibles, and services not covered by health insurance are also
allocated to the household. Excluded from household spending are health insurance premium tax credits
and cost-sharing subsidies from Marketplace plans, continuation of health coverage (COBRA) subsidies,
federal and state & local payments for the Basic Health Program, and Medicaid buy-ins for the Medicare
premiums of people eligible for both Medicaid and Medicare (dual eligibles).

Other Private Sponsors
Other private sponsors include all other private sponsors of health care other than private businesses and
households such as privately funded research, privately funded structures and equipment, philanthropic
support, and non-patient revenue. Philanthropic support may be direct from individuals or may be obtained
through philanthropic fund-raising organizations such as the United Way. Support may also be obtained from
foundations or corporations. Philanthropic revenues may be spent directly for patient care or may be held in
an endowment fund to produce income to cover current expenses. For institutions such as hospitals, nursing
homes and home health agencies, other private funds also include income from the operation of gift shops,
cafeterias, parking lots, educational programs, and investment income. Also included in this category are
private investment in research, structures, and equipment.

Federal Government
The federal government finances many federal health care programs from general revenues, most notably
Medicare spending not paid for by other sponsors or dedicated payroll taxes. Also, as an employer, the
federal government pays employer-sponsored insurance premiums and Medicare Hospital Insurance (HI)
Trust Fund payroll taxes for federal employees. The federal government sponsor estimate also includes the
federal share of the Medicaid program, the federal portion of Medicare premium buy-in programs by
Medicaid, Medicare retiree drug subsidy payments beginning in 2006, payments for Department of Defense,
Department of Veterans Affairs, Indian Health Service, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, other federal programs (including COVID-19 response funding from the Provider Relief Fund
and the Paycheck Protection Program), public health activities, the federal share of Maternal and Child
Health, vocational rehabilitation, Children’s Health Insurance Program, workers’ compensation,
continuation of health coverage (COBRA) subsidy payments, small business tax credits, Early Retirement
Reinsurance Program payments, Basic Health Program payments, health insurance premium tax credits and
cost-sharing subsidies from Marketplace plans, and federal investment in research, structures and
equipment. Excluded from federal government spending are Pre-existing Conditions Insurance Plan


                                                       31
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

premiums, Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) premiums, and Part D state phase-down
payments to Medicare.

State and Local Government
State and local governments finance health care programs and also pay for health insurance coverage for
state and local government employees. This estimate includes the employer contribution for employer-
sponsored insurance premiums and Medicare Hospital Insurance (HI) Trust Fund payroll taxes for state
employees. The state and local government’s portion of payroll taxes are included with the state and local
government sector because they are dedicated taxes earmarked for health care spending. Also included is
the state share of the Medicaid program, the state portion of Medicare premium buy-in programs by
Medicaid, receipts from states for phased-down Medicaid contributions for Medicare Part D, Basic Health
Program payments, other state and local programs such as general assistance, school health, Maternal and
Child Health, vocational rehabilitation, Children’s Health Insurance Program, public health activities, other
state and local programs, and state and local investment in research, structures and equipment. Excluded
from state and local government spending are Early Retirement Reinsurance Program payments and
Medicare retiree drug subsidy payments to state and local government employer plans.




                                                     32
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Health Insurance Enrollment and the Uninsured
The enrollment estimates in the NHEA cover total private health insurance (PHI) (including direct and
employer-sponsored plans), Medicare, Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and other
public programs, as well as an estimate of the uninsured. These estimates of enrollment are generally for a
specific point in time (Medicaid is a person-year estimate, which is essentially a proxy for a point-in-time
estimate).

Total Private Health Insurance Enrollment
Total private health insurance (PHI) enrollment consists of enrollment in employer-sponsored insurance and
direct purchase plans (group and non-group) including Marketplace and Medigap policies. The enrollment
estimates are not mutually exclusive and cannot be summed within PHI as individuals can be enrolled in
multiple types of plans. The 1960-1986 estimates were based on data from the National Center for Health
Statistics’ National Health Interview Survey, 89 data from the Health Insurance Association of America, 90 and
                                            88F                                                        89F




analysis performed by Marjorie Carroll and Ross H. Arnett, III. 91 For 1987-2009, total PHI estimates were
                                                              90F




developed from the State Health Access Data Assistance Center’s (SHADAC) enhanced Current Population
Survey (CPS) 92 coverage estimates adjusted by the Office of the Actuary to reflect the overcount of
             91F




individually purchased health insurance enrollment in the CPS. Enrollment for 2010 forward was estimated
using the sum of the individual and employer insurance estimates adjusted to account for the overlap of
health insurance coverage.

Employer-Sponsored Insurance
Employer-sponsored insurance (ESI) is purchased through an employer, union, or by a self-employed
individual. For 1987-1995, ESI enrollment was estimated using the growth in the number of policies for
employer-purchased health insurance from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Consumer Expenditure Survey34
applied to the enhanced CPS levels in 1996. Enrollment for 1996-2009 was estimated using the levels from
the State Health Access Data Assistance Center’s (SHADAC) enhanced Current Population Survey (CPS).92
Enrollment for 2010 through 2013 was estimated using data from the National Center for Health Statistics’
National Health Interview Survey.89 Enrollment for 2014-forward was estimated using data from CPS, with
the exception of 2019, which used data from the American Community Survey.

Direct Purchase Insurance
Medigap: Medigap plans are standardized health insurance plans that are sold by private insurance
companies to Medicare beneficiaries to fill the "gaps" in Medicare coverage. These plans are available to
people aged 65 or older and to some individuals under age 65 with certain disabilities, and people of all ages
with end-stage renal disease (ESRD). August point-in-time levels from the Coordination of Benefits (COB) file
were used to estimate Medigap enrollment for the period 2014-2024. Estimates for 2002-2013 were
developed using the average relationship between COB and National Association of Insurance
Commissioners data in the years 2013-2017. Estimates for years prior to 2002 were based primarily on
trends from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey
(MCBS).33

Marketplace: Under the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), health insurance coverage was expanded
through private insurers allowing individuals to purchase from both federal and state-run health insurance
Marketplaces. Marketplace average monthly enrollment was estimated using program data from CMS.

Other Direct Purchase: This category includes insurance purchased on the private market that is not
associated with an employer or a Medigap or Marketplace plan. Examples of direct purchase insurance
include group plans purchased through the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) or other
associations, non-group plans (both ACA-compliant and ACA non-compliant such as grandfather and
grandmother plans), Short-Term Limited Duration (STLD) Health plans, and the Basic Health Program
(BHP). Estimates of enrollment for 2014 – 2024 were derived from the Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) Data and


                                                      33
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

System Resources public use file (CMS, Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight). STLD health plan
enrollment estimates were derived using data from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners,
and BHP enrollment estimates were derived using data from states with BHP plans. 93 For 1996-2013,
                                                                                   92F




enrollment was estimated using the levels from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household
Component (MEPS-HC),41 while 1987-1995 was estimated using the growth in the number of covered lives for
individually purchased health insurance from the Consumer Expenditure Survey34 applied to the MEPS-HC
level in 1995.

Medicare
For 2016 forward, Medicare enrollment is from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ Chronic
Condition Data Warehouse (CCW), a database with 100% of Medicare enrollment derived from the Common
Medicare Environment database. Prior to 2016, the source for Medicare enrollment was the Denominator
File, which used data from the Medicare Enrollment Database. Medicare enrollment from the CCW includes
counts of all Medicare beneficiaries who were enrolled on or after January 1 of a calendar year. The
estimates of Medicare Part A and/or B enrollment use a person-year methodology, which sums the number
of months each beneficiary is enrolled during the year and divides by 12. Additionally, an adjustment is made
to create U.S. only enrollment figures by removing enrollment for U.S. territories.

Medicaid
Medicaid enrollment estimates for 1966-1974 were developed using data from the Institute for Medicaid
Management, while estimates for 1975-1998 were developed using the Medicaid Statistical Reports (HCFA-
2082). The enrollment estimates for Medicaid from 1999 to 2004 were from the Medicaid Statistical
Information System (MSIS); the 2005-2013 estimates were developed using Medicaid Analytic eXtract (MAX)
data;46 and 2014 through 2024 estimates were estimated by the Office of the Actuary using the form CMS-
64. 94 Medicaid new adult group enrollment estimates from 2014-2024 were also developed using the form
   93F




CMS-64.

Children’s Health Insurance Program
CHIP enrollment estimates are obtained through the Statistical Enrollment Data System using forms CMS-
21E, CMS-64.21E, and CMS-64.EC.

Other Public
Other public programs include health insurance coverage provided by the Department of Defense (DOD) and
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). Enrollment for other public programs for 1987-2011 was estimated
using the levels from the State Health Access Data Assistance Center’s (SHADAC) enhanced Current
Population Survey (CPS),92 and for 2012 through 2016 estimates were extrapolated using the CPS. From
2017-2021 and 2024, enrollment is estimated based on data from the DOD 95 and the VA. 96 The 2022 and
                                                                          94F            95F




2023 estimates were based on the trend from the CPS for those years.

Uninsured
Persons not covered by health insurance (including individuals using the Indian Health Service in order to be
consistent with CPS definitions) are considered uninsured. The number of uninsured for 1987-2009 was
estimated using the levels from the State Health Access Data Assistance Center’s (SHADAC) enhanced
Current Population Survey (CPS)92 adjusted for an estimate of the Medicaid undercount, and for 2010 to 2018
estimates were extrapolated using growth from National Health Interview Survey (NHIS).89 The 2019 estimate
was extrapolated using 2019/2018 trend from the American Community Survey. The 2020 estimate was
extrapolated using the 2020/2018 trend from the CPS. The 2021 estimate was based on the population share
of the uninsured from the NHIS. The 2022 estimate was based on the 2022/2021 trend from the American
Community Survey. The 2023 and 2024 estimates were based on NHIS share of the uninsured multiplied by
the NHE population.


                                                     34
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Deflating National Health Expenditures
Increased health care spending reflects increases in technological developments, changes in the
demographic composition of the population, changes in the intensity and quantity of health care services
delivered per person, and price inflation for medical goods and services. Deflating health care spending
separates the effects of price growth from growth attributable to all other factors. The dollar value of these
estimates of real health care expenditures is determined by the index chosen to remove price growth from
spending.

One approach to deflating health spending is to remove the effects of economy-wide inflation alone. Prior to
the 2011 NHEA, this was the method used to deflate health spending for the NHEA. The most appropriate
deflator for economy-wide prices for this purpose is the price index for the gross domestic product (GDP), as
measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The GDP deflator is the most comprehensive measure
of price inflation for the economy as a whole. This measure eliminates economy-wide inflation, a cause of
growth over which the health sector has little control.

An alternative approach to removing the effects of price growth from health spending is to deflate health care
expenditures by a measure of medical specific price inflation. For personal health care (PHC) spending, this
involves directly deflating expenditures by price indexes associated with the services and goods provided; for
non-PHC spending this involves deflating by composite indexes matching the components of spending for
each category. The resulting measure of “real” growth associated with this approach reflects growth in non-
price factors, which can result from technological developments, changes in the demographic composition
of the population (by age, sex, and proximity to death), or any changes in the intensity and quantity of health
care services delivered per person. Also, this residual includes the net effect of any error in the measurement
of medical prices or medical expenditures.

The goal of deflating spending at the national health expenditure (NHE) level is to isolate price changes so
that “real NHE” spending can be determined. Thus, it is critical that the measure used to deflate spending at
the NHE level accurately reflects price changes only and does not capture any of the biases that can occur
when aggregating individual indexes. The chain-weight method used in the NHE deflator attempts to control
for any aggregation bias by using a Fisher Ideal formulation. The Fisher Ideal index formulation reflects the
geometric mean of a Laspeyres index, which uses a prior-period quantity weights, and a Paasche index,
which uses the current period quantity weights. Chain-weighted inflation measures would give a lower
inflation rate than standard inflation rates if substitutions were made over time to purchase less of the goods
that were experiencing faster price growth.

The PHC deflator is calculated as a chain-weighted price index for the various goods and services that
account for PHC spending in the NHE. Exhibit 6 provides the detailed price series that are used for each
category of spending. 97 Unlike the 2010 method, which used an implicit deflator approach, the current PHC
                      96F




deflator relies on a chain-weighted approach.

In order to estimate a non-PHC deflator, a chain-weighted price index of the subcomponents of non-PHC is
estimated. This index weights together the detailed price series for each non-PHC component, at the
maximum level of detail available. Exhibit 7 provides the major non-PHC expenditure categories and their
respective deflators.

The price indexes developed by the Office of the Actuary are a more appropriate measure of the medical
price inflation associated with expenditures reported in the NHEA than two other available indexes—the
Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Medical Care Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for all urban consumers and the
BEA medical care component of the personal consumption expenditure fixed-weight price index.

For example, the medical care component of the CPI is weighted based on consumer out-of-pocket
expenditures, Medicare Part B payments, and private health insurance payments to providers for medical
benefits. 98 Without consideration of all types of payers and programs, certain health care services are
         97F




assigned weights that under- or over-represent their shares if all payers and programs expenditures were


                                                       35
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

considered. Additionally, the medical care component of the PCE price index is not an optimal index to use
since it excludes spending on care provided by government facilities.

The BLS Producer Price Index (PPI) is a third measure of price inflation. The PPI measures transaction prices
or net prices received by producers for their output. Receipts include those from both public and private
sources. However, most PPIs for the health service industry begin in 1994 or later and therefore lack a
sufficient time series to span the entire history of the NHEA.

Deflators Used in the Personal Health Care Price Index
Exhibit 6 lists the price series assigned to each component of PHC expenditures. All data used are as
published except for the following: the CPI for Prescription Drugs for 2003, 2006, 2012-2013, and 2015-2023,
and the PPI for Office of Physicians for 2021 (see footnote in Exhibit 6).

Exhibit 6: Price Proxies for the Personal Health Care Expenditure Price Index

Industry/Commodity or Service                   Price proxy
Personal Health Care
Hospital Care                           PPI, hospitals
Physician and Clinical Services         Composite Index: PPI, offices of physicians and PPI, medical
                                        and diagnostic laboratories
Other Professional Services             CPI, services by other medical professionals
Dental Services                         CPI, dental services
Other Health, Residential, and Personal Composite Index:
Care                                        • CPI physician services (used for other health care)
                                            • CPI care of invalids and elderly at home (used for home
                                                 and community-based waivers),
                                            • CPI All Items (used for ambulance services)
                                                     •   PPI residential developmental disability homes (used
                                                         for residential facilities)
Home Health Care                                PPI, home health care services
Nursing Care Facilities and Continuing          PPI, nursing care facilities
Care Retirement Communities
Prescription Drugs                              CPI, prescription drugs
Other Non-durable Medical Products              CPI, non-prescription drugs
Durable Medical Equipment                       Composite Index: CPI, eyeglasses and eye care and CPI,
                                                medical equipment and supplies
Notes: Data for the PPI and CPI are available from the U.S. Department of Labor, BLS, http://www.bls.gov. All indexes are
scaled to 100.0 in 2017. The underlying PPI and CPI indexes used to construct the chain-weighted National Health
Expenditure deflator are at times adjusted for unique factors where the trends in the index do not match the
definition/scope or trends in the expenditure categories that are being deflated. Examples include adjustments that
account for the movement of retail prescription drugs to the over-the-counter market, prescription drug manufacturer
rebates, and differences in the underlying prices in public programs (such as Medicare and Medicaid).




                                                           36
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


Deflators Used in the Non-Personal Health Care Price Index
Exhibit 7 lists the price series assigned to each component of non-PHC expenditures. Details for each of the
price proxies for each non-PHC category are provided in the text following Exhibit 7.

Exhibit 7: Price Proxies for the Non-Personal Health Care Expenditure Price Index

Industry/Commodity or Service                    Price proxy
Non-Personal Health Care
Government Administration                        Composite index of wages, benefits, professional fees,
                                                 claims/financial intermediary services, office rent, and other
                                                 expenses for six government programs
Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures               Composite index of compensation, capital, taxes and fees,
                                                 reserves/gains/losses, and other expenses for five classes of
                                                 insurance
Government Public Health Activities              Composite index of federal, state, and local government
                                                 consumption
Research                                         National Institutes of Health Biomedical Research and
                                                 Development Price Index 99
                                                                          98F




Structures & Equipment                           Composite Index of BEA Price indexes for private fixed
                                                 investment in structures by type and private fixed investment in
                                                 equipment and software by type
Note: All indexes are scaled to 100.0 in 2017.

Unlike the PHC deflator where typically one price series is used to represent the pure price change
associated with a constant product, the non-PHC categories are typically deflated by an input price index
that represents the price increases associated with the expenses underlying the production of these
categories (the notable exceptions are non-commercial research and structures and equipment). 100      99F




Because of the unique nature of the non-PHC categories, published price series are not typically available for
these categories, or those that are available may not adequately capture the concepts appropriate for the
given non-PHC category. Instead, alternative data sources are used to decompose these expenses into the
key underlying inputs, such as compensation or capital costs, and then publicly available price series are
used to deflate those input expenses. A brief description of each price deflator follows.

Government Administration
Government administrative costs are deflated using a composite input price index that chain-weight together
price indexes for wages and salaries, benefits, professional fees, claims processing services, office rent and
other expenses. The input weights reflect six sub-categories of government administrative costs: Medicare,
Department of Defense, Department of Veterans Affairs, Medicaid, Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP), and other third-party payers. The weights are determined using data from the Medicare Trustees
Report, Medicaid administrative data, and congressional justifications. The price series for each of the
categories represent proxies for price change, such as federal civilian pay, employment cost indexes for
state and local government workers, and other relevant occupations and appropriate PPIs and CPIs.

Non-Medical Insurance Expenditures
For non-medical insurance expenditures, the nominal spending level is deflated using a chain-weighted
composite index of input costs and price proxies designed to directly measure the price growth associated
with the difference between health insurance expenditures and benefits incurred. This difference includes
cost growth for administrative services, taxes and fees, changes to reserves, and net underwriting gains or
losses. There are five types of private health insurance for which non-medical insurance expenditures are


                                                          37
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024

estimated. The first type groups together: individual direct purchase or non-group insurance, the majority of
worker’s compensation insurance, the health portion of property and casualty insurance, and pre-existing
conditions insurance plans from 2010-2014. The second type is fully insured group/commercial insurance.
The third type is self-insured ESI. The fourth type is Medicare Advantage and stand-alone Medicare Part D
plans, and the fifth type is Medicaid and CHIP managed care plans.

For each type of insurance, estimates are developed for five general components of non-medical insurance
expenditures that sum to the total for this category. These components include: compensation of the
employees that are administering the insurance, capital costs, taxes and fees, other costs (such as rent,
advertising, certain commissions, etc.), and, in some cases, changes to reserves and underwriting gains or
losses. A blended index of price proxies, typically BLS Employment Cost Index’s (ECIs), BLS PPIs, or
deflators produced as part of the BEA’s National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), are weighted together
by the respective input costs for three of these general components. All changes in taxes and/or changes to
reserves or underwriting gains or losses are treated as price changes. These various price changes are then
combined to create a composite non-medical insurance expenditures input price deflator.

Government Public Health Activities
Public health spending in the NHEA is deflated using a composite index that chain-weights together price
indexes for state and local and federal public health, with state and local expenditures accounting for the
majority of the index. State and local public health expenditures are deflated using the price index for gross
state and local government consumption expenditure for health from the NIPA produced by the BEA. Federal
public health expenditures are deflated using an input cost index that weight together the input costs of the
Health Resources and Services Administration, the Food and Drug Administration, and the Centers for
Disease Control and appropriate price proxies from the BLS. Together these three organizations account for
the majority of federal public health spending.

Structures & Equipment
Investment in structures and equipment is deflated using a composite index that chain-weights together
detailed price indexes associated with private fixed investment in structures and equipment, by detailed
asset category. The detailed nominal investment levels by asset category serve as the weights to aggregate
up to the composite chain-weighted price index for structures and equipment. These detailed asset
distributions are obtained primarily using data from the BEA’s Capital Flow Table and Fixed Asset Accounts.
Five categories of detailed investment in structures are derived using this methodology: hospital and
institutional, office buildings, industrial, electric light and power, and other buildings. Twenty-two categories
of detailed investment in equipment are derived as well. Additionally, appropriate price indexes for
investment in structures and equipment are selected for each of these categories. The price indexes are
from BEA’s Table 5.4.4. Price Indexes for Private Fixed Investment in Structures by Type; Table 5.5.4. Price
Indexes for Private Fixed Investment in Equipment by Type; and Table 5.6.4 Price Indexes for Private Fixed
Investments in Intellectual Property Products by Type.




                                                       38
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024


References

1
  The Cabinet-level Department of Health, Education and Welfare was created under President Eisenhower
on April 11, 1953. In 1979, the Department of Education Organization Act was signed into law, providing for a
separate Department of Education. HEW became the Department of Health and Human Services on May 4,
1980. For more information, see U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Historical highlights
[Internet]. Washington (DC): HHS; [cited 2025 Dec 1]. Available from: https://www.hhs.gov/about/historical-
highlights/index.html
2
  U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. National Income and Product Accounts [Internet]. Suitland (MD): U.S.
Department of Commerce [cited 2025 Dec 1]. Available via query
from: https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/index_nipa.cfm
3
  Hartman M, Kornfeld R, Catlin A. A reconciliation of health care expenditures in the National Health
Expenditures Accounts and in Gross Domestic Product [Internet]. Washington (DC): Bureau of Economic
Analysis, Survey of Current Business; 2010 Sep [cited 2025 Dec 1]. Available
from: https://apps.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2010/09%20September/0910_healthcare.pdf
4
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Health Expenditures, Projected [Internet]. Baltimore
(MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-
data/projected
5
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Health Expenditures, Age and Sex [Internet]. Baltimore
(MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/age-
and-sex
6
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Health Expenditures, State (Provider) [Internet].
Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/state-
provider
7
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Health Expenditures, State (Residence) [Internet].
Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/state-
residence
8
 U.S. Census Bureau sources such as the Economic Census are based on the 2017 version of NAICS. Please
see Census Bureau. North American Industry Classification System [Internet]. Washington (DC): Census
Bureau; 2017 [cited 2025 Dec 1]. Available from: https://www.census.gov/naics
9
 Census Bureau. Economic Census Data Tables and FTP Files by Year [Internet]. Census Bureau; Suitland
(MD): 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997, 2002, 2007, 2012, 2017, 2022 [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/economic-census/data/tables.html
10
  Census Bureau. Service Annual Survey [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau [cited 2026 Jan 8].
Available from: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/sas.html
11
     American Hospital Association. Annual Survey of Hospitals. Chicago (IL).
12
  Census Bureau. Quarterly Services Survey [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau [cited 2026 Jan 8].
Available from: http://www.census.gov/services/index.html




                                                       39
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024



13
  Internal Revenue Service. Data tabulated from samples of business income tax returns. Washington (DC):
Internal Revenue Service; 1960–1989.
14
  Journal of Emergency Medical Services (JEMS) [Internet]. United States: JEMS Communication; 1980–
[cited 2026 Jan 9]. Available from: https://www.jems.com/

 McDonnell P, Guttenberg A, Greenberg L, Arnett R. Self-insured health plans. Health Care Financ Rev. 1986
15

Winter;8(2):1–16. HCFA Pub. No. 03226.
16
  Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Price Index [Internet]. Washington (DC): Bureau of Labor Statistics
[cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: http://www.bls.gov/cpi/
17
  Mercer LLC. National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans [Internet]. New York (NY): Mercer [cited
2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.mercer.com/en-us/solutions/health-and-
benefits/research/national-survey-of-employer-sponsored-health-plans/
18
  Kaiser Family Foundation. Employer Health Benefits Survey [Internet]. Washington (DC): Kaiser Family
Foundation [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.kff.org/series/employer-health-benefits-survey/
19
  National Center for Education Statistics. Common Core of Data: America’s Public Schools [Internet].
Washington (DC): National Center for Education Statistics [cited 2026 Jan 9]. Available via query from:
https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/files.asp
20
  National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Education Statistics [Internet]. Washington (DC):
National Center for Education Statistics [cited 2026 Jan 9]. Available via query from:
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/current_tables.asp
21
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicare Provider Analysis and Review [Internet]. Baltimore
(MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 9]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/medicare-fee-for-service-parts-a-
b/medpar

 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Chronic Conditions Data Warehouse [Internet]. Baltimore (MD):
22

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 9]. Available from: https://www2.ccwdata.org/
23
  Health Care Financing Administration. Tabulations from Medicare’s home health cost reports. Baltimore
(MD): Health Care Financing Administration; 1974–1976 and 1981–1984. Unpublished.
24
  Freeman V. Income and expenditures in voluntary public health nursing agencies, 1967. Nurs Outlook.
1969 Mar;17:40–3.

 Bureau of Labor Statistics. Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages [Internet]. Washington (DC):
25

Bureau of Labor Statistics [cited 2026 Jan 12]. Available from: https://www.bls.gov/cew/

 National Center for Health Statistics. National Nursing Home Survey [Internet]. Hyattsville (MD): National
26

Center for Health Statistics; 1972–2004 [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available via query from: https://archive.cdc.gov/
27
  Census Bureau. Current Employment Statistics - CES (National) [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau
[cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.bls.gov/ces/
28
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Skilled Nursing Facility Market Basket [Internet]. Baltimore
(MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/medicare-program-rates-
statistics/market-basket-data




                                                      40
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024



29
  Census Bureau. Monthly Retail Trade [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau; 1982–2017 [cited 2026 Jan
8]. Available from: https://www.census.gov/retail/index.html
30
  IQVIA. Unpublished data from the National Prescription Audit and the Method of Payment Report. Durham
(NC): IQVIA; 1992–2024.
31
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medical Loss Ratio Data and System Resources [Internet].
Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.cms.gov/marketplace/resources/data/medical-loss-ratio-data-systems-resources

 Health Care Cost Institute. Health Care Cost and Utilization Report [Internet]. Washington (DC): Health
32

Care Cost Institute Inc.; 2018-2022 [cited 2026 Jan 12]. Available from: https://healthcostinstitute.org/hccur/
33
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey [Internet]. Baltimore (MD):
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 12]. Available from: https://www.cms.gov/data-
research/research/medicare-current-beneficiary-survey
34
  Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Expenditure Surveys [Internet]. Washington (DC): Bureau of Labor
Statistics; 1960–2020 [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.bls.gov/cex/

 Visiting Nurse Association of America. Survey of Visiting Nurse Association of America Members.
35

Washington (DC): Visiting Nurse Association of America; 1988.
36
  American Medical Association. Socio-economic Monitoring System. Chicago (IL): American Medical
Association;1984–2001.
37
  American Dental Association. Annual Survey of Dental Practice. Chicago (IL): American Dental Association;
1980–2000.
38
  Research Triangle Institute. Benchmark Studies of the National Health Accounts. Research Triangle Park
(NC): Research Triangle Institute; 1987 Mar. Contract No.: 500-86-0042. Prepared for the Health Care
Financing Administration.
39
  National Center for Health Services Research. National Medical Care Expenditure Survey. Washington
(DC): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 1977, 1987.
40
  National Center for Health Statistics; Health Care Financing Administration. National Medical Care
Utilization and Expenditure Survey. Washington (DC): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 1980.
Unpublished.
41
   Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household Component
[Internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/survey_comp/household.jsp
42
     A.M. Best. A.M. Best’s Financial Suite, Statement Products. Oldwick (NJ): A.M. Best; 2001–2024.
43
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Unpublished data from the Center for Consumer Information
and Insurance Oversight.
44
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital
Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.cms.gov/data-
research/statistics-trends-and-reports/trustees-report-trust-funds

 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicaid Expenditure Reports [Internet]. Baltimore (MD):
45

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:



                                                       41
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024



https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/financial-management/state-budget-expenditure-reporting-for-
medicaid-and-chip/expenditure-reports-mbes/cbes
46
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicaid Analytic eXtract [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/data-
systems/macbis/medicaid-chip-research-files/medicaid-analytic-extract-max-general-information
47
   Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Transformed Medicaid Statistical Information System (T-MSIS)
Analytical Files (TAF) [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8].
Available from: https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/data-systems/macbis/medicaid-chip-research-
files/transformed-medicaid-statistical-information-system-t-msis-analytic-files-taf
48
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Approved State Directed Payment Preprints [Internet].
Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/managed-care/guidance/state-directed-payments/approved-state-
directed-payment-preprints
49
   Census Bureau. Health Care and Social Assistance: Revenue by Type of Payer for the US and States: 2017
[Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://data.census.gov/table/ECNTYPEPAYER2017.EC1762TYPEPAYER?q=EC1762TYPEPAYER&hidePrevie
w=true

 U.S. Department of Defense. TRICARE Management Activity. Resource Management. Washington (DC):
50

Department of Defense; 1981–2024.
51
  U.S. Department of Defense. Unpublished data from the Medical Expense and Performance Reporting
System for Fixed Military Medical and Dental Treatment Facilities. Washington (DC): Department of Defense;
2006–2020.

 U.S. Department of Defense. TRICARE Management Activity. Data Quality and Functional Proponency.
52

Washington (DC): Department of Defense; 1980–2024.
53
  U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Unpublished data from the Allocation Resource Center. Washington
(DC): Department of Defense; 1999-2024.

 Executive Office of the President. Budget of the United States Government. Washington (DC): Office of
54

Management and Budget.
55
  U.S. Department of the Treasury. Monthly Treasury Statement (MTS) [Internet]. Washington (DC): U.S.
Department of the Treasury [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://fiscaldata.treasury.gov/datasets/monthly-treasury-statement/summary-of-receipts-outlays-and-the-
deficit-surplus-of-the-u-s-government
56
  U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Budget [Internet]. Washington (DC): Department of Veterans Affairs
[cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://department.va.gov/administrations-and-
offices/management/budget/
57
  Insurance Information Institute. Facts + statistics [Internet]. Malvern (PA): Insurance Information Institute;
2002–2023 [cited 2025 Dec 4]. Available from:https://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-homeowners-
and-renters-insurance; https://www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-auto-insurance
58
   National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Motor Vehicle Traffic Crash Data Resource Page
[Internet].Washington (DC): National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 2019–2023 [cited 2026 Jan 8].
Available via query from: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/#!/




                                                      42
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024



59
   National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Market Share Reports for Groups and Companies
[Internet]. Washington (DC): National Association of Insurance Commissioners [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available
via query from: https://content.naic.org/publications

 National Academy of Social Insurance. Workers’ Compensation Benefits, Costs, and Coverage.
60

Washington (DC):National Academy of Social Insurance.
61
  National Association of State Budget Officers. State Expenditure Report [Internet]. Washington (DC):
National Association of State Budget Officers [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.nasbo.org/reports-data/state-expenditure-report

 Public Health Foundation. Public Health Agencies: Expenditures and Sources of Funds. Washington (DC):
62

Public Health Foundation; 1977–1990.

 Maternal & Child Health Bureau. Explore the Title V Federal-State Partnership [Internet]. Rockville (MD):
63

Maternal & Child Health Bureau cited [2026 Jan 8]. Available from https://mchb.tvisdata.hrsa.gov/
64
  U.S. Department of Education. Fiscal Year 2023-FY 2025 President’s Budget State Tables for the U.S.
Department of Education. Washington (DC): U.S. Department of Education [cited 2026 Jan 12]. Available
from: https://www.ed.gov/about/ed-overview/annual-performance-reports/budget/budget-tables/fiscal-
year-2023-fy-2025-presidents-budget-state-tables-us-department-of-education#update
65
  Rehabilitation Services Administration. View data. Washington (DC): Rehabilitation Services Adminstration
[cited 2026 Jan 12]. Available from https://rsa.ed.gov/data/view-data
66
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Accounting for Federal COVID Expenditures in the National
Health Expenditure Accounts [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited
2026 Jan 8]. Available from: www.cms.gov/files/document/accounting-federal-covid-expenditures-national-
health-expenditure-accounts.pdf

 National Center for Educational Statistics. Digest of Education Statistics. Washington (DC):National
67

Center for Educational Statistics; 2008.
68
     This category was formerly labeled “Net cost of health insurance”.
69
   Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Insurance Component
[Internet]. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 1996–2006, 2008–2024. Available
from: https://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/survey_comp/Insurance.jsp
70
     National Association of Blue Cross and Blue Shield. Personal communication. Chicago (IL): 1960–2005.
71
     National Underwriter Company. Argus Chart of Health Insurance. New York (NY): 1960–1996.
72
     American Association of Health Plans. Annual Publication. Washington (DC): 1984–1994.
73
  National Institutes of Health. NIH Data Book 1994. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services; 1995 Mar. NIH Pub. No. 95-1261.
74
  National Science Foundation. Survey of Federal Funds for Research and Development [Internet].
Alexandria (VA): National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://ncses.nsf.gov/surveys/federal-funds-research-development/2023-2024
75
  National Science Foundation. Higher Education Research and Development Survey [Internet]. Alexandria
(VA): National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://ncses.nsf.gov/surveys/higher-education-research-development/2024




                                                        43
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024



76
  Suozzo A, Glassford A, Ngu A, Roberts B. Nonprofit Explorer [Internet]. ProPublica;2025 Dec 22 [cited 2026
Jan 8]. Available via query from: https://projects.propublica.org/nonprofits/
77
  Urban Institute. Welcome to the National Center for Charitable Statistics [Internet]. Washington (DC):
Urban Institute [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available at https://nccs.urban.org/
78
  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Healthcare
Provider Cost Reporting Information System (HCRIS), Form CMS-2552-10. [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): CMS;
[cited 2025 Dec 10]. Available from: https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/cost-
reports
79
  Census Bureau. Annual Capital Expenditures Survey (ACES) [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau
[cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/aces.html.
80
  Census Bureau. Construction Spending [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau [cited 2026 Jan 8].
Available from: https://www.census.gov/construction/c30/c30index.html.
81
  Census Bureau. Manufacturers’ Shipments, Inventories, & Orders [Internet]. Suitland (MD): Census Bureau
[cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://www.census.gov/manufacturing/m3/index.html.
82
  In general, COBRA requires certain employers to continue to offer former employees and their dependents
health insurance coverage at a cost of 102 percent of the employer premium for a period of 18 months.
83
     Office of Personnel Management. Unpublished data.1987–2024.

 Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employer Costs for Employee Compensation [Internet] Washington (DC):
84

Bureau of Labor Statistics [cited 2026 Jan8]. Available from: https://www.bls.gov/ecec/
85
     National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Personal communication. Chicago (IL): 1960–2005.
86
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medigap (Medicare Supplement Health Insurance) [Internet].
Baltimore (MD) [cited 2026 Jan8]. Available from: https://www.cms.gov/medicare/health-drug-
plans/medigap
87
  As part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) persons that lost their jobs
involuntarily had a temporary reduction in their COBRA premiums. The period of coverage was initially for 9
months and then extended to 15 months as the result of the COBRA Coverage Extension Act of 2009. If a
person or family member was involuntarily terminated during the period from September 1, 2008 to May 31,
2010 the household may be eligible to pay a reduced premium. Eligible individuals pay only 35 percent of the
COBRA premium under their plan for up to 15 months. Data for the estimates of the amount of COBRA
subsidy was from U.S. Department of the Treasury. Interim Report to The Congress on COBRA Premium
Assistance. Washington (DC): June 2010.
88
  A small expenditure for workers’ compensation covering federal employees is the financial responsibility of
the federal government as an employer. In both the National Health Expenditure Accounts’ source of funding
and sponsor presentations, workers’ compensation for federal employers is in the federal category.
89
  National Center for Health Statistics. National Health Interview Survey [Internet]. Washington (DC):
National Center for Health Statistics; 1966–2024 [cited 2026 Jan8]. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/index.html
90
  Health Insurance Association of America. Source Book of Health Insurance Data. Washington (DC): HIAA;
1989-2001.




                                                     44
National Health Expenditure Accounts (NHEA): Methodology Paper, 2024



91
  Carroll MS, Arnett RH. Private health insurance plans in 1978 and 1979: a review of coverage, enrollment,
and financial experience. Health Care Financ Rev. 1981 Sep;3(1):55–87. HCFA Pub. No. 03123.
92
  State Health Access Data Assistance Center. SHADAC‐Enhanced Current Population Survey Health
Insurance Coverage Estimates: A Summary of Historical Adjustments [Internet]. Minneapolis (MN): State
Health Access Data Assistance Center; 2009 Nov [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.shadac.org/files/shadac/publications/TechBrief_CPSEnhanced.pdf
93
  Oregon and Minnesota had BHPs in 2024 (OHP Bridge and MinnesotaCare, respectively). Also included is
New York’s plan, the Essential Plan, which was previously a BHP until 2024 when it gained funding through a
Section 1332 innovation waiver.
94
  Medicaid.gov. Medicaid Enrollment Data Collected Through MBES [Internet]. Baltimore (MD): Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/national-medicaid-chip-program-information/medicaid-chip-
enrollment-data/medicaid-enrollment-data-collected-through-mbes
95
   Health.mil. Evaluation of the TRICARE Program: Fiscal Year Report to Congress [Internet]. Falls Church
(VA): Defense Health Agency [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from: https://health.mil/Military-Health-
Topics/Access-Cost-Quality-and-Safety/Health-Care-Program-Evaluation/Annual-Evaluation-of-the-
TRICARE-Program
96
  U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Survey of Veteran Enrollees’ Health and Use of Health Care [Internet].
Washington (DC): Department of Veterans Affairs [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://www.va.gov/health/survey.asp
97
  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. National Health Expenditure Accounts: NHE Deflator [Internet].
Available from: https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and-
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/downloads/nhe-deflator.pdf
98
  Ford IK, Ginsburg DH. Medical care in the Consumer Price Index. In: Medical Care Output and Productivity.
Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 62. Cambridge (MA): University of Chicago Press; 2001.
99
  National Institutes of Health. Biomedical Research and Development Price Index [Internet]. Washington
(DC): National Institutes of Health; 2025 Jun [cited 2026 Jan 8]. Available from:
https://officeofbudget.od.nih.gov/gbipriceindexes.html.
100
   The growth of the input price indexes serves as a proxy for the output price increase associated with the
production of these services since a specific output price index is unavailable. This approach implicitly
assumes that changes in productivity (and in some cases margins) average to roughly zero such that the
input price equals the output price.




                                                      45
